0 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


Question #1 ANSWER=C 

In patients with urinary obstruction and impaired renal function, post-obstructive 
diuresis is not unusual. Typically, urinary catheter drainage produces improvement 
in the blood levels of creatinine, BUN, and electrolytes to normal levels. If significant 
improvement does not occur, consideration must be given to inadequate drainage 

of the upper urinary tract because the bladder is poorly drained (poorly functioning 

catheter) or because of supravesical obstruction. The latter should be evaluated 
using renal ultrasound which is less invasive than retrograde pyelography. Since 
creatinine and BUN have not improved, continued observation is inappropriate until 
upper tract obstruction is ruled out. No data is provided to suggest the need for 
immediate dialysis. There is no evidence the patient is dehydrated; therefore, 
increased fluid replacement is not indicated. 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Post obstructive diuresis. Updated March 1, 
2021. https://university.auanet.org/core/consults-emergencies/consults-emergencies


post-obstructive-diuresis/index.cfm 

Question #2 ANSWER=C 

The blood supply of the omentum arises from the gastroepiploic arteries. The 

superior mesenteric, gastroduodenal, short gastric, and inferior mesenteric arteries 
do not directly supply the omentum and should not be mobilized for omental wraps. 

Nakada SY, Best SL: Management of upper urinary tract obstruction, in Partin AW, 
Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN 
UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 2, chap 89, p 1980. 

Question #3 ANSWER=B 

The frequency of ureteral injuries from penetrating trauma is low. Given this 
location, however, there is a high likelihood of ureteral injury, regardless of the 
appearance of the IVP. These injuries may be difficult to detect because the IVP is 
either normal or indeterminate in approximately 70% and hematuria may be absent 
in up to 45%. Retrograde ureteropyelography or injection of dyes (i.e., I.V. 
fluorescein) may miss such injuries because the blast injury often results in delayed 

sloughing. Without gross hematuria, a bladder injury is unlikely, and therefore 
intravesical methylene blue is unnecessary. A high index of suspicion is necessary for 

diagnosis of a ureteral injury and the most accurate method is ureteral inspection. 
Given the vein repair, the area of interest is exposed, and inspection should not be 

difficult. 

Morey AF, Brandes S, Dugi III DD, et al: Urotrauma: AUA Guideline. J UROL 
2014,192:327. https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/guidelines/urotrauma-guideline 

0 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 1 


Question #4 ANSWER=B 

Orthostatic hypotension is not a contraindication for alpha-blockers providing the 
blood pressure change is not associated with postural symptoms. Alpha-blockers, 
such as alfuzosin, are the first-line treatment for men with BPH/LUTS and their 
effectiveness is independent of prostate size. Alfuzosin has the lowest rate of 
ejaculatory dysfunction (< 1%) of all the medicines in this class. Finasteride will 
decrease semen volume and will take several months to take effect. While the rate 
of retrograde ejaculation with TUIP is low, it still has an approximately 11% rate of 
ejaculatory dysfunction. Transurethral vaporization of the prostate has a high rate 
of retrograde ejaculation, similar to TURP. If this man fails to improve on alfuzosin, 
UroLift° might be an option. However, while UroLift° does not cause retrograde 
ejaculation, it is not currently recommended for patients with enlarged median 
lobes. Rezum” is an option for this patient should he fail medical therapy or choose 
not to undergo a trial of medical therapy. 

Capogrosso P, Salonia A, Montorsi F: Evaluation and nonsurgical management of 
benign prostatic hyperplasia, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, 
Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 
2020, vol 3, chap 145, pp 3357-3374. 

Helo S, Welliver RC Jr, McVary KT: Minimally invasive and endoscopic management of 
benign prostatic hyperplasia, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, 
Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, 
vol 3, chap 146, pp 3423-3442. 

Lerner LB, McVary KT, Barry ML, et al: Management of lower urinary tract symptoms 
attributed to benign prostatic hyperplasia: AUA Guideline Part I—Initial work-up 
and medical management. J UROL 2021;206:806.https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/
guidelines/benign-prostatic-hyperplasia-(bph)-guideline 

Lerner LB, McVary KT, Barry ML, et al: Management of lower urinary tract symptoms 
attributed to benign prostatic hyperplasia: AUA Guideline Part II—Surgical 
evaluation and treatment. J UROL 2021;206:818.https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/
guidelines/benign-prostatic-hyperplasia-(bph)-guideline 

Question#5 ANSWER=D 

When faced with a patient with a persistent urinary fistula, the acronym FETID will 
aid the physician in determining its etiology and management plans: F-Foreign 
Body, E-Epithelization of the fistula tract, T-Tumor or chronic trauma causing 
persistence, I-Infection, or chronic inflammation arising from inflammatory bowel 
disease, XRT, etc., D-Distal obstruction. In this young patient with a history of 
persistent fistula following closure of a bladder rupture after a pelvic fracture, 
persistent drainage from a suprapubic tube site is most likely from either a foreign 
body within the bladder (i.e., bony spicule or bladder calculi formed as a nidus from 

2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


the prior indwelling suprapubic tube) or bladder outlet obstruction arising from 
either a bladder neck contracture or urethral stricture. The single best diagnostic 
study is cystourethroscopy. Pressure flow UDS could demonstrate findings consistent 
with high-pressure voiding and outlet obstruction. But the source of the obstruction, 
which is likely a urethral stricture or a bladder neck contracture, would not be able 
to be determined by this test and this test does not rule-out the possibility of a 

foreign body within the bladder. A CT scan may allow one to visualize either a 

foreign body (bone or hardware) or bladder calculi but would not be able to assess 
the urinary outlet. Similarly, a fistulogram or pelvic MRI scan are unlikely to yield 
adequate diagnostic information in this situation to result in definitive operative 
plans. 

De Ridder DJMK, Greenwell T: Urinary tract fistulae, in Partin AW, Peters CA, 
Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 

12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, chap 129, p 2925. 
AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Urinary fistulas. Updated December 22, 2020. 
https://university.auanet.org/core/fpmrs/urinary-fistulas/index.cfm 

Question #6 ANSWER=A 

The patient has a clinical presentation, radiographic features, and laboratory studies 
consistent with a paraganglioma. Initial management should involve alpha-blockade 
to establish blood pressure control. Staging evaluation for metastases in this setting 

is recommended, with galIium-68 dotatate PET having emerged as the preferred 

imaging modality. Dotatate has a high affinity for the somatostatin surface receptor, 

which is expressed by paragangliomas, and thereby facilitates detection of 

metastatic disease which may in turn impact management. Iodine-131-MIBG 
represents a form of systemic therapy that may be utilized for patients with metastatic 
disease or locally unresectable tumors in whom a prior MIBG scan has been obtained 
and is positive. Meanwhile, adrenal vein sampling has been reported to have a 
sensitivity of 95% and a specificity of 100% for detecting lateralized autonomous 
aldosterone secretion but would not be indicated in the evaluation of a patient with 
a likely retroperitoneal paraganglioma. Both cisplatin and etoposide as well as 

mitotane are systemic therapy options for patients with metastatic adrenocortical 
carcinoma (with cisplatin/etoposide preferred) but would not be indicated here in a 
functional paraganglioma and without documented metastatic disease. 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Adrenal neoplasms. Updated December 22, 
2020. https://university.auanet.org/core/oncology-adult/adrenal-neoplasms 

NCCN GUIDELINES, Neuroendocrine tumors, 2019, version 3.3021. 
https://www.nccn.org/professionals/physician gis/pdf/neuroendocrine.pdf 

2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


Jha A, Ling A, Millo C, et al: Superiority of 68Ga-DOTATE over 18F-FDG and anatomic 
imaging in the detection of succinate dehydrogenase mutation (SDHx)-related 
pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma in the pediatric population. EUR J NUCL 
MED MOL IMAGING 2018;45:787-797. 

Tan TH, Hossein Z, Saad TFA, et al: Diagnostic performance of 68Ga-DOTATE PET/CT, 

18F-FDG PET/CT, and 1311-MIBG scintigraphy in mapping metastatic 
pheochromocytoma and paraganlioma. NUCL MED MOL IMAGING 2015;49:143-151. 

Lenders JWM, Duh QY, Eisenhofer G, et al: Pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma: 

An Endocrine Society Clinical Practice Guideline. J CLIN ENDOCRINOL METAB 

2014;99:1915-1942. 

Question #7 ANSWER=C 

The patient has the urologic finding of incontinence combined with fecal soiling and 

a high-arched foot abnormality. A foot abnormality, such as a high-arched foot or 

abnormal gait, can signify a tethered cord. A tethered cord due to occult spinal 

dysraphism needs to be ruled out as the cause of his incontinence. Tethered cord 
syndrome is a stretch-induced functional disorder of the spinal cord with the most 
caudal part of the cord anchored by inelastic structures. Specific treatment of his 
detrusor overactivity with timed voids, medication, and/or treatment of constipation 
is appropriate after a neurologic cause is excluded. CIC would not be needed without 
evidence of urinary retention. 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Spina bifida and neurogenic bladder. Updated 
December 23, 2020. https://university.auanet.org/core/pediatric/spina-bifida-andneurogenic-
bladder/index.cfm 

Kowalik CCG, Wein AJ, Dmochowski RR: Neuromuscular dysfunction of the lower 

urinary tract, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): 
CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, 

chap 116, p 2618. 

Question #8 ANSWER=B 

This patient likely has urgency urinary incontinence secondary to detrusor 
overactivity, as indicated by the random nature of the incontinence. UDS will fail to 

demonstrate involuntary bladder contractions in approximately 50% of patients 

with clinical urgency urinary incontinence. SUI occurs during increased abdominal 

pressure, and she is not describing leakage during these types of events such as 

coughing, lifting, and exercise. In addition, SUI, including intrinsic sphincter 
deficiency, is not demonstrated on UDS since urinary leakage did not occur during 
Valsalva maneuvers. The characteristics of the incontinence are not consistent with 

a VVF as the urinary leakage is not continuous. She has a normal detrusor pressure 

at the end of filling, confirming normal compliance (300 mL/6 cm H2O=50mL/cm 

Oc 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


HCO). Her PVR of 40 mL demonstrates that she is not in urinary retention and thus 
rules out overflow incontinence. 

Brucker BM, Nitti VW: Urodynamic and video-urodynamic evaluation of the lower 
urinary tract, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): 

CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, 
chap 114, p 2550. 

Question #9 ANSWER=B 

Penetrance for all of the manifestations of VHL is incomplete. In particular, 

pheochromocytomas have been found to cluster only in certain families with VHL, 
primarily those with a missense mutation of the VHL gene. A careful family history 

and thorough review of preoperative CT scans for potential associated tumors are 
important in all patients with familial RCC. Indeed, pheochromocytomas are a critical 

entity to recognize prior to any surgical intervention, given the potential 

perioperative morbidity of an unrecognized pheochromocytoma. The other listed 

manifestations of VHL are not as well-characterized by familial clustering. 

Campbell SC, Lane BR, Pierorazio PM: Malignant renal tumors, in Partin AW, Peters 

CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, 

ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 2, chap 97, pp 2141-2143. 

Question #10 ANSWER=A 

Urinary ammonium excreted by the kidneys is reabsorbed by the intestinal segment 

and then returned to the liver via the portal circulation. The liver metabolizes 

ammonium to urea via the ornithine cycle. The liver usually adapts to the excess 
ammonia in the portal circulation without difficulty and rapidly metabolizes the urea. 

In the setting of hepatic dysfunction, the hepatic reserve for ammonium metabolism 
may be exceeded, resulting in the complication of an ammoniagenic coma. The 

syndrome, however, also has been described in patients with normal hepatic 
function. Systemic bacteremia, with endotoxin production, inhibits hepatic function 

and may precipitate this clinical entity. UTIs with urea-splitting organisms may also 

overload the ability of the liver to clear the ammonia. If this syndrome occurs in a 

patient suspected of having near-normal hepatic function, systemic bacteremia or 

urinary obstruction should be suspected. Prompt urinary drainage with treatment 

of the offending urinary pathogens along with systemic antibiotics and the 
administration of oral neomycin or lactulose to reduce the absorption of ammonia 
in the gastrointestinal tract are the key components to patient management. There 

is no indication for the use of Vitamin B12, sodium bicarbonate, nicotinic acid, 

thiamine, and folic acid in this clinical setting. 

Wintner A, Dahl DM: Use of intestinal segments in urinary diversion, in Partin AW, 

Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN 

UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, chap 139, p 3201. 

0 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


Question #11 ANSWER=B 

This patient has a high IPSS with a significant bother score, therefore watchful 
waiting is not appropriate, and he should be offered intervention. A VA study of 
1229 patients randomized to placebo, alpha-blocker therapy, finasteride, or 
combination therapy with alpha-blockers plus finasteride showed the superiority of 
alpha-blocker therapy alone in improvement of symptoms and peak flow rate. Other 
than an additional reduction in prostate volume, combination therapy with 
finasteride did not provide significantly more symptom relief. Combination therapy 
may be beneficial in a man with an enlarged prostate; however, there is no 
indication that the prostate is enlarged in this individual, and therefore, the initial 
cost and potential adverse effects of combination therapy are not justified in this 
untreated patient. Medical therapy of prostatic symptoms has shown a reduction in 
BPH progression with combination therapy, though this question focuses on 
symptomatic relief in a patient without significant prostatic enlargement, which 
would be best achieved by alpha-blockade alone. This patient has no absolute 
indication for surgical therapy such as UroLift®although it may be considered ifthe 

patient chooses not to undergo medical therapy. 

Capogrosso P, Salonia A, Montorsi F: Evaluation and nonsurgical management of 
benign prostatic hyperplasia, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, 
Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 
2020, vol 3, chap 145, pp 3351-3380. 

Lerner LB, McVary KT, Barry ML, et al: Management of lower urinary tract symptoms 
attributed to benign prostatic hyperplasia: AUA GUIDELINE PART I—Initial work-up 
and medical management. J UROL 2021;206:806. https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/guideIines/benign-prostatic-hyperplasia-(bph)-guideline 

Question #12 ANSWER=D 

Excessive placement of clips when managing the gonadal, adrenal, or lumbar 
branches of the left renal vein can severely restrict the working space available for 
safe placement of the endovascular stapler later in the case when the main renal 

vein is to be addressed. Application of the stapler across a clip can lead to stapler 
misfire and subsequent hemorrhage and should therefore be avoided. Use of clips is 
not likely to significantly impact the ability to perform the lymphadenectomy, 
adrenalectomy, the ability to achieve negative margins, or the ability to control the 

renal artery. 

Moreira DM, Kavoussi LR: Laparoscopic and robotic surgery of the kidney, in Partin 
AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN 
UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 2, chap 102, p 2288. 

2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


Question #13 ANSWER=C 

Urine leak following partial nephrectomy occurs in up to 15% of cases. If a 
postoperative drain is left in situ, spontaneous closure of the urinary leak usually 
occurs within two to four weeks. In the case of an unrecognized or delayed urinary 
leak, the presence of an adjacent urinoma may prevent fistula closure and predispose 
the patient to infection/abscess formation. Percutaneous drainage of the urinoma is 
the preferred method used to control a delayed pyelocutaneous fistula. If the leak 
does not heal with drainage of the urinoma, consideration should be given to the 
possibility of either ureteral/bladder obstruction or bladder dysfunction as a cause of 
the persistent fistula. In these situations, a cystoscopy with a retrograde pyelogram 
followed by ureteral stent and urethral catheter placement should be pursued. The 
concomitant urethral catheter is used to aid healing by preventing high-pressure 

reflux up the ureteral stent and/or to treat bladder outlet obstruction or voiding 

dysfunction as an etiology for the persistent urinary fistula or urinary leak. PCNT would 
be considered if a ureteral stent could not be placed. 

De Ridder DJMK, Greenwell T: Urinary tract fistulae, in Partin AW, Peters CA, 
Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 

12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, chap 129, p 2962. 
Question #14 ANSWER=E 

The continued use of I.V. street drugs while under treatment directly affects the 
likelihood of medical success. His abusive and illegal behavior could stem from his 
underlying social pathology or could indicate alterations in mental capacity from 
additional infected cerebral sites. The use of street drugs coupled with an assault on 
the hospital staff should result in turning this patient over to legal authorities, who 
can mandate and supervise additional diagnosis and treatment. This will provide 
security for the treating staff and protection of the patient from his own actions. 

Bone C, Eysenbach L, Bell K, et al: Our ethical obligation to treat opioid use disorder 

in prisons: A patient and physician's perspective.J LAW MED ETHICS 2018;46:268-271. 

Question #15 ANSWER=A 

PVR measurement has significant intra-individual variability and does not correlate 
well with other signs or symptoms of lower urinary tract dysfunction. The VA 
Cooperative Study Group (which evaluated men with bothersome LUTS secondary to 
bladder outlet obstruction) demonstrated that PVR does not predict the outcome of 
surgery and the majority of men with large residual urine volume did not require 
surgery during the duration of the trial. Men with significant PVRs should be 
monitored more closely if they elect no therapy. This man would be considered to 

have low risk chronic urinary retention (PVR > 300 mL) because he has no signs or 

symptoms of upper tract deterioration or UTls. Medical therapy for BPH is indicated 

O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


in men who have bothersome symptoms that negatively affect their quality of life. 
First-line medical therapies include alpha-blockers, 5-alpha-reductase inhibitors, or a 
combination of the two. Minimally invasive or surgical therapy, such as Rezum°, is 
not indicated in men without bothersome symptoms. 

Stoffel JT, Peterson AC, Sandhu JS, et al: AUA White Paper on nonneurogenic chronic 
urinary retention: Consensus definition, treatment algorithm, and outcome end 
points. J UROL 2017;198:153-160. 

Capogrosso P, Salonia A, Montorsi F: Evaluation and nonsurgical management of 
benign prostatic hyperplasia, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, 
Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 
2020, vol 3, chap 145, pp 3346-3351. 

Lerner LB, McVary KT, Barry ML, et al: Management of lower urinary tract symptoms 
attributed to benign prostatic hyperplasia: AUA GUIDELINE PART I—Initial work-up 
and medical management. J UROL 2021;206:806. https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/guideIines/benign-prostatic-hyperplasia-(bph)-guideline 

Question #16 ANSWER=E 

A test with high sensitivity (good for screening) reliably finds a disease when it is 
present and avoids false negatives. A test with high specificity (good for 
confirmation) reliably excludes a disease when it is absent and avoids false positives. 
Positive predictive value is the probability a person has disease if test result is 
positive. Negative predictive value is the probability a person does not have the 
disease if the test result is negative. The test result can be true positive (TP), true 
negative (TN), false positive (FP), or false negative (FN). The number with disease = 

TP + FN = 50. FN = 10; therefore, TP = 40. The number without disease = FP + TN = 

50. FP = 20; therefore, TN = 30. The prevalence of disease in this study is 50%. 
Sensitivity = TP/(TP + FN) = 40/(40 + 10) = 80%. Specificity = TN/(FP + TN) = 30/(20 + 
30) = 60%. Positive predictive value = TP/(TP + FP) = 40/(40 + 20) = 67%. Negative 
predictive value = TN/(FN + TN) = 30/(10 + 30) = 75%. 
Elmore JG, Wild DMG, Nelson HD, Katz DL: Understanding the quality of medical 
data, in Elmore JG, Wild DMG, Nelson HD, Katz DL (eds): EPIDEMIOLOGY, 
BIOSTATISTICS, PREVENTIVE MEDICINE, AND PUBLIC HEALTH, ed 15. Philadelphia, 
Elsevier, 2020, chap 7, pp 98-112. 

Question #17 ANSWER=D 

The cystogram demonstrates an open bladder neck at rest. The UDS tracing shows 
that there was no detrusor activity at the instant the image was obtained. An openbladder neck at rest in a male is highly suggestive of multiple system atrophy (MSAformerly 
known as Shy Drager Syndrome) in the absence of prior prostate surgery. 
Although other neurological diseases may result in an open bladder neck at rest, 

O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


none of these are listed except MSA. Erectile dysfunction is often found in MSA, and 
this finding in concert with the open bladder neck at rest distinguishes this condition 
from Parkinson's disease (PD) which is often clinically similar in many other respects. 
Other symptoms of MSA may include other autonomic dysfunctions. Bladder neck 

dyssynergy would have a closed bladder neck with filling. Cervical spinal stenosis and 
MS would not typically have an open bladder neck at rest. A further distinction 

between PD and MSA is that bladder symptoms occur earlier in the course of MSA 
compared to PD patients. 

Kowalik CCG, Wein AJ, Dmochowski RR: Neuromuscular dysfunction of the lower 
urinary tract, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): 

CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, 

chap 116, pp 2606-2607. 

Question #18 ANSWER=B 

The patient should receive appropriate analgesics, and surgical consent should be 
obtained only by a member of the surgical team. This surgeon has the common 

misconception that informed consent is somehow invalidated by the presence of 
specific medications. Patients who present for surgery may have taken a variety of 
medications, many of which can have effects on mental function. The issue is not 
whether the patient has been premedicated, but whether premedication has 
impaired the patient's ability to participate in the informed consent process. While 
it is appropriate to give pain medication, it is not appropriate to obtain consent from 
another party if the patient still has decision-making capacity. The ethical issues 
involved in this case include assessment of the patient's capacity to make decisions 
and whether the patient is deliberately or otherwise being coerced into consenting 
for surgery. The patient's capacity to provide consent is determined not by what 

recent medications have been given but by whether the patient understands the 
need for treatment, can listen to and understand treatment options and risks, and 
can then express a choice regarding their care. Respect for patient autonomy 

requires that we promote a patient's ability to make an "unencumbered" choice. 

Severe pain, by impairing a patient's ability to listen and understand, is an 
encumbrance to the informed consent process. Further, withholding pain 
medication for the purpose of obtaining consent might be coercive. 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Ethics. Updated March 1, 2021. 
https://university.auanet.org/core/ethisc/ethics/index.elm 

Question #19 ANSWER=C 

A concomitant incontinence procedure should be considered given her SUI 
symptoms and demonstration of loss of urine with Valsalva on UDS. A pubovaginal 
fascial sling would treat the SUI without increased risk of urethral erosion. 
Concomitant placement of a synthetic midurethral sling should be avoided because 
of the potential risk of infection and erosion into the urinary tract and according to 

0 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 9 


AUA Guidelines is not recommended at the time of urethral diverticulectomy. A 
Martius fat pad will not treat the incontinence. Her intrinsic sphincter deficiency, as 
suggested by the Valsalva LPP, is better treated with a sling rather than a Burch 
procedure. 

Cox L, Rovner ES: Bladder and female urethral diverticula, in Partin AW, Peters CA, 
Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 

12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, chap 130, p 2964. 
Kobashi KC, Albo ME, Dmochowski RR, et al: Surgical treatment of female stress 
urinary incontinence (SUI): AUA/SUFU Guideline. J UROL 2017;198:875. https://
www.auanet.org/guidelines/guidelines/stress-urinary-incontinence-(sui)-guideline 

Question #20 ANSWER=E 

The patient has stable curvature precluding him from having sexual intercourse. His 
hemodynamic assessment indicates normal arterial inflows (peak systolic velocities > 
30 cm/sec). However, there is evidence of veno-occlusive dysfunction (end diastolic 

velocities > 5 cm/sec). Intralesional injection therapy has not been shown to render 

men with this severity of curvature functional. Shock wave therapy is only indicated 
for pain related to Peyronie's disease. Plication surgery will result in significant loss 
of penile length because of the degree of curvature and will not address the erectile 
dysfunction due to venous leakage. According to the AUA Guidelines on Peyronie's 
disease, clinicians may offer plaque incision or excision and/or grafting to patients 
with deformities whose rigidity is adequate for coitus (with or without 
pharmacotherapy and/or vacuum device therapy) to improve penile curvature. In 
men with this preoperative hemodynamic profile and erectile dysfunction, the 
procedure will not improve his erectile dysfunction and will render him incapable of 
having intercourse even with a straight penis. Penile implant surgery is indicated in 
men with this degree of curvature and erectile function. 

Seftel AD, Yang H: Diagnosis and management of Peyronie's disease, in Partin AW, 
Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN 
UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 2, chap 73, p 1599. 

Nehra A, Alterowitz R, Culkin DJ, et al: Peyronie's disease: AUA Guideline. J UROL 
2015;194:745. 
https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/guidelines/peyronies-disease-guideline 

Question #21 ANSWER=C 

It is recognized that underlying genitourinary malformations or other pathologies 
are at least three-fold more common in pediatric patients relative to adults 
undergoing evaluation for trauma. This is a classic case for raising the concern of an 
underlying abnormality since the gross hematuria seems out of proportion with the 
low severity of the trauma. The underlying problems may include hydronephrosis, 

2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


multicystic kidney, Wilms' tumor, and various renal fusion anomalies. Therefore, it is 
appropriate to image with ultrasound to look for such potentially significant 
problems. A patient should not be considered for admission with serial examinations 
and hematocrit determination unless there is a documented substantial renal injury. 
Cystoscopy is not indicated in the initial evaluation of gross hematuria in children. 
CT scan would only be indicated if there is significant injury or abnormality on 
ultrasound or if the mechanism of injury was more concerning. 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Trauma. Updated February 24, 2021. 

https://university.auanet.org/core/pediatric/pediatric-trauma/index.cfm 

Question #22 ANSWER=D 

When combined with trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX) or ampicillin, 

aminoglycosides are the first drugs of choice for febrile UTIs. Their nephrotoxicity 

and ototoxicity are well-recognized; hence, careful monitoring of patients for renal 
and auditory impairment as well as serum levels is indicated. Once-daily 

aminoglycoside regimens have been instituted to maximize bacterial killing by

optimizing the peak concentration to minimal inhibitory concentration ratio and 

reduce the potential for toxicity. Administering an aminoglycoside as a single daily 

dose can take advantage not only of its concentration-dependent killing ability but 

also of two other important characteristics: time-dependent toxicity and a more 

prolonged post-antimicrobial effect. The regimen consists of 5-7 mg/kg daily dose of 
gentamicin or 5-7 mg/kg dose of tobramycin. Subsequent interval adjustments are 

made by obtaining a single concentration in serum and a nomogram designed for 

monitoring of once-daily therapy. Antimicrobial doses are given at the interval 
determined by the drug concentration of a sample obtained after the start of the 
initial infusion. This regimen is clinically effective, reduces the incidence of 
nephrotoxicity, and provides a cost-effective method for administering 

aminoglycosides by reducing ancillary service times and serum aminoglycoside 

determinations. In this case, the serum level of gentamicin is high and requires 

adjustment. Changing the dosing interval from every 24 hours to every 36 hours is 

indicated. Decreasing the dose may lead to the same reduction in levels but with a 

reduction in effectiveness. Although the patient continues to have symptoms, this is 
common during the initial course of pyelonephritis and is not an indication at 48 
hours to change antibiotic regimen. There are no indications to start aztreonam or 

n-acetylcysteine. 

Cooper KL, Badalato, GM, Rutman MP: Infections of the urinary tract, in Partin AW, 
Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN 

UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 2, chap 55, pp 1154-1155. 

Question #23 ANSWER=D 

In boys with proximal hypospadias, the prostatic utricle is often enlarged. In a 

female, this would represent the distal one-third of the vagina. The utricle is of 

O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


urogenital sinus origin. While an ectopic ureter or bladder diverticulum could have 
a similar appearance on ultrasound, they generally are not midline in location. 

Ectopic ureter or bladder diverticulum are not commonly seen with hypospadias. A 

cecoureterocele would have a bladder deformity in addition to a suburethral 

extension. A Cowper's duct cyst, also known as a syringocele, should be confined to 

the bulbous or prostatic urethra where Cowper's ducts drain. 

Long CJ, Zaontz MR, Canning DA: Hypospadias, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, 

Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. 

Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 1, chap 45, p 905. 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Hypospadias. Updated March 1, 2021. 

https://university.auanet.org/core/pediatric/hypospadias/index.cfm 

Question #24 ANSWER=B 

Concomitant use of alpha-blockers and PDE-5 inhibitors can cause hypotension. 

When tadalafil is coadministered with an alpha-blocker, patients should be stable 
on alpha-blocker therapy prior to initiating treatment with tadalafil, and tadalafil 
should be initiated at the lowest recommended dose. Conversely, when starting an 
alpha-blocker, the lowest dose of either agent should be used, and they should not 
be taken at the same time. There is no need to stop tadalafil in this patient or switch 
to intracorporal injections if he has been successful on oral therapy. Of all the 
choices, decreasing to the lowest effective dose of tadalafil (10 mg for use as needed 

or 2.5 mg/day for once daily use) would be recommended for this man. 

Burnett AL II, Ramasamy R: Evaluation and management of erectile dysfunction, in 

Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL 
WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 2, chap 69, p 1513. 

Question #25 ANSWER=C 

Disseminated BCG (grade 3 serious complications) presents with systemic signs and 

symptoms, some of which are due to acute inflammatory response to the bacillus. 

Thus, systemic steroids are recommended in addition to the standard drug regimen 

to which a BCG-associated infection usually responds. BCG, an attenuated strain of 
Mycobacterium bovis, is poorly controlled by pyrazinamide due to uniform 

resistance. Cycloserine often causes severe psychiatric symptoms and is strongly 
discouraged. The immunosuppressant cyclosporine has no role in the management 

of disseminated BCG. There is no clear evidence of a bacterial infection, so the use 

of gentamicin is not indicated. 

Zabell J, Konety BR: Management strategies for non-muscle invasive bladder cancer 
(Ta, T1, and CIS), in Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): 

CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, chap 

136, p 3012. 

12 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


Nadasy KA, Patel RS, Emmett M, et al: Four cases of disseminated Mycobacterium 
bovis infection following intravesical BCG instillation for treatment of bladder 
carcinoma. SOUTH MED J 2008;101:91-95. 

Question #26 ANSWER=E 

Patients with a concentrating defect due to obstruction such as PUV may present 
with worsening incontinence along with upper urinary tract deterioration due to 

excessive urine production. The urine volume will not decrease significantly with 
either salt or water restriction. Furthermore, water restriction is dangerous and often 

counterproductive, as it may lead to dehydration. Patients with a renal 

concentrating defect typically do not respond to DDAVP. Unless there is evidence of 
myogenic failure and incomplete bladder emptying, daytime CIC to further eliminate 

PVR is unlikely to help this patient. It has been suggested that continuous nighttime 

drainage can improve the fluid dynamics, thus restoring the upper urinary tract 
(decreasing bilateral hydroureteronephrosis), as well as improving daytime urinary 

incontinence. 

Shukla AR, Srinivasan AK: Posterior urethral valves, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi 
LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. 

Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 1, chap 33, pp 618-619. 

Question #27 ANSWER=A 

Malakoplakia is an inflammatory process occurring more commonly in women than 

men (4:1). Irritative voiding symptoms are common, as is hematuria. It is associated 

with UTIs, most notably those due to E. coli. Most lesions are yellow, raised, and soft. 

Histologic examination reveals aggregates of large histiocytes (von Hansemann cells) 

which contain concentrically laminated calcific inclusions (Michaelis-Gutmann 

bodies). The primary disorder responsible for the disease may be abnormal bacterial 

digestion by tissue macrophages. Once an accurate diagnosis is made, patients 
should be treated with antibiotics (such as trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole or 
fluoroquinolone). Use of bethanechol or ascorbic acid may enhance phagolysosomal 

activity. Extensive surgery is rarely necessary, although it may be needed to manage 

upper urinary tract involvement. The other answers are incorrect: fluconazole is for 

yeast infection, dimethylsulfoxide (DMSO) is for interstitial cystitis, corticosteroids is 

not the correct treatment for malakoplakia, and isoniazid and rifampin is for 

tuberculosis. 

Cooper KL, Badalato GM, Rutman MP: Infections of the urinary tract, in Partin AW, 

Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowsl‹i RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN 

UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 2, chap 55, pp 1179-1181. 

Rames RA, Bissada NK: Extensive pelvic malakoplakia: Diagnosis and management. J 

UROL 1995;154:523-524. 

O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


Question #28 ANSWER=A 

Primary idiopathic (endemic) calculi are commonly found in children from North 

Africa, the Middle East, and Asia. With a large immigrant population in the United 

States, it is important to be aware of this health problem. These children classically 

rely on a cereal-based diet that is lacking in animal proteins. The lack of protein leads 

to a dietary phosphate deficiency, low urinary phosphate, and high levels of urinary 

ammonia. Due to this, the most common stone found in children from these areas is 

ammonium acid urate. High urinary sodium, calcium, and oxalate are not 

characteristic findings with endemic bladder stones. 

Pearle MS, Antonelli JA, Lotan Y: Urinary lithiasis: Etiology, epidemiology, and 

pathogenesis, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): 

CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 2, 

chap 91, p 2032. 

Question #29 ANSWER=B 

Intoxication plus blunt abdominal injury, abdominal pain, and gross hematuria 

suggest a bladder perforation. The CT scan shows a low-grade renal injury. Although 

bed rest and serial hemoglobins are the appropriate management of low-grade 

renal injury, it is insufficient to focus on management of a low-grade renal injury 

when the bladder has not been completely evaluated. Discovery of a significant 

bladder injury could alter your decision for bed rest and possibly require surgical 

exploration. Similarly, renal embolization and renorrhaphy are both not indicated 

for low-grade renal injury and should not be performed. Therefore, a catheter 

should be placed and a cystogram performed. It is not necessary to perform a 

retrograde urethrogram when gross hematuria is present; this is indicated when 

there is blood at the meatus in the setting of a pelvic fracture or when a catheter 

cannot be passed into the bladder. 

Morey AF, Brandes S, Dugi III DD, et al: Urotrauma: AUA Guideline. J UROL 

2014;192:327. https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/guidelines/urotrauma-guideline 

Question #30 ANSWER=C 

Impedance refers to the resistance to flow of electrons through a circuit. If there is 

too much resistance, the flow is limited. In the case of sacral neuromodulation, the 

circuit includes the neurostimulator circuitry, the extension, leads, patient tissue, and 

back to the circuitry, including all the connections. If the circuit is disrupted, for 

example, by a broken lead or a defective connection, impedances may be high. 

Patients may describe a sudden or gradual loss of sensation of stimulation or change 

in the character or location of the stimulation. If some electrodes show normal 

readings, the device should be reprogrammed using those electrodes prior to an 

exploration or revision. Turning the device off does not provide any helpful 

14 O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


information with regards to impedance. Changing pulse width will not be helpful 
when the problem is too much impedance. Lead replacement is warranted if 
impedance is abnormal in all electrodes or i1 symptoms recur despite normal 
impedances, the latter of which would suggest a current leakage or lead 

displacement. 

Heesakkers JPFA, Blok B: Electrical stimulation and neuromodulation in storage and 

emptying failure, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ 
(eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, 
chap 122, p 2739. 

Question #31 ANSWER=D 

Patients who undergo bladder augmentation with bowel should be counseled on 

the possible long-term risk of carcinoma formation, renal and bladder calculi, and 
metabolic abnormalities. The earliest report of tumor formation is four years after 

bladder augmentation with bowel. Yearly cystoscopic surveillance and cytology have 

been recommended by the international Children's Continence Society (ICCS) as soon 

as 5 to 10 years following augmentation, but the evidence indicating the efficacy of 
screening protocols in this patient population is insufficient. Recent studies have 
shown that routine yearly endoscopy is not indicated due to the low incidence of 

malignancy following a bladder augmentation (approximately 2-4%), lack of proven 

benefit, and high cost. In the absence of other risk factors, the current 

recommendation is for annual visits with renal and bladder ultrasound (rule-out stones 
or the development of hydronephrosis secondary to non-compliance with CIC), 
electrolytes (rule out metabolic abnormalities), creatinine, serum B12 (rule-out 

nutritional deficiencies), and urinalysis (assess for hematuria). FISH analysis and CEA 

levels have not been proven standard of care for monitoring for the development 
of adenocarcinoma following bladder augmentation. Endoscopy is reserved for 

individuals with a past medical history of gross hematuria, microscopic hematuria (> 

50 RBC/hpf), new onset of hydronephrosis (rule-out tumor obstructing the ureteral 

orifice), bladder calculi, chronic bladder/perineal pain, or a history of four or more 

symptomatic UTI per year. Using this screening criteria, > 90% of tumors arising in a 
bladder augment can be discovered without the use of annual endoscopy. 

Estrada DR, Bauer SB: Neuromuscular dysfunction of the lower urinary tract in 

children, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): 
CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 1, 
chap 34, p 636. 

Higuchi TT, Fox JA, Husmann DA: Annual endoscopy and urine cytology for the 

surveillance of bladder tumors after enterocystoplasty for congenital bladder 
anomalies. J UROL 2011;186:1791-1795. 

Question #32 ANSWER=E 

0 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


Transurethral manipulation with dilation, DVIU, or laser urethrotomy has little to no 
success with strictures 3 cm in length. An excision and primary anastomosis of a 3 cm 
stricture at the distal bulbar urethra would create excessive tension and ischemia at 

the anastomotic site. This is in comparison to a proximal bulbar urethral stricture 
where the compliance of the urethral tissue is much greater, and the ability to 
mobilize the urethra more extensively to create a tension-free anastomosis is 
possible. Graft or flap interposition is the best option in this clinical scenario. 

Wessells H, Angermeier KW, Elliott SP, et al: Male urethral stricture: AUA Guideline. 
J UROL 2017;197:182. https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/guidelines/urethral


stricture-guideline 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Urethral stricture disease. Updated January 19, 

2021. https://university.auanet.org/core/reconstructive-uroIogy/urethral-stricturedisease-
and-reconstruction/index.cfm 

Question #33 ANSWER=A 

Reservoirs made of detubularized ileum appear to have the greatest compliance and 

lowest likelihood of generating intermittent high-pressure contractions. Several 

clinical studies have demonstrated that the urodynamic characteristics of the ileum 
appear to be superior to those of the colon and is, therefore, the preferred segment 
of bowel used for a neobladder. Larger bowel lengths with increased intra-operative 
volumes are not necessary as all bowel segments effectively stretch over time if there 
is adequate outflow resistance. In fact, commonly utilized techniques (i.e., Studer, 
Hauptmann) utilize 40-44 cm of detubularized ileum with resultant intra-operative 

volumes of 200 mL or less. For ileal neobladders, it has been shown that the capacity 
increases sevenfold after one year. The true benefits of anti-refluxing anastomosis 

remain uncertain. It does not appear that conduit pressures are transmitted to the 
renal pelvis. Also, there is no difference in conduits between those with versus 

without reflux, with regard to renal function measured two to five years 

postoperatively. Furthermore, the successful construction of an anti-refluxing 
anastomosis does not prevent bacterial colonization of the renal pelvis. Many of 
these patients in fact have no untoward effects and do well despite chronic 
bacteriuria. Deterioration of the upper tracts is more likely when the culture 
becomes dominant for Proteus or Pseudomonas, and should therefore be treated in 
such cases, whereas those with mixed cultures may generally be observed (provided 
they are not symptomatic). 

Skinner EC, Daneshmand S: Orthotopic urinary diversion, in Partin AW, Peters CA, 

Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 

12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, chap 141, pp 3241-3242. 
Wintner A, Dahl DM: Use of intestinal segments in urinary diversion, in Partin AW, 
Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN 
UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, chap 139, pp 3192-3193. 

16 O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


Question #34 ANSWER=B 

Following hysterectomy, even a high VVF can often be repaired through a vaginal 

approach. Note that the literature does not clearly support the need for a graft in a 
primary VVF repair. However, of the grafts listed, a simple procedure to augment 

the repair is harvest of the peritoneum which is often present around the vaginal 

apex. This peritoneal flap can be placed over the two-layer fistula closure. Omentum 
can easily be harvested through a transabdominal approach but would not be an 

option transvaginally. Buccal mucosa has been described in case reports but would 
not offer benefit over more local tissue for a primary repair. Martius flaps are more 
commonly used for distal fistulas such as a urethrovaginal fistula. Myocutaneous 

flaps such as a gracilis flap are not appropriate for primary repair of a 

straightforward fistula. 

De Ridder DJMK, Greenwell T: Urinary tract fistulae, in Partin AW, Peters CA, 

Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. 

Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, chap 129, p 2924. 

Question #35 ANSWER=C 

BCG maintenance therapy is indicated for patients with CIS (even if focal) who 

achieve a complete response to initial induction treatment. In particular, the 

Southwest Oncology Group (SWOG) trial reported an estimated median recurrence


free survival of 76.8 months in patients receiving maintenance BCG versus 35.7 

months in the no maintenance arm (p < 0.0001). In that study, which has defined the 
current preferred regimen for maintenance BCG, patients received a six-week 

induction course followed by three weekly instillations of maintenance at three and 

six months and then every six months thereafter for three years. This patient is at 

the three-month point and should therefore receive the first set of maintenance 
treatments as the next step. Bladder biopsy is not necessary if the patient's 
cystoscopy and cytology are negative. Observation alone is not optimal therapy 
unless the patient has a contraindication or serious complication from BCG. Monthly 

BCG has been described and is commonly used but has not been tested against the 
maintenance schedule proven to be effective in the large published SWOG trial. In 
addition, investigators in a phase III clinical trial (NIMBUS Trial) compared a standard 

BCG schedule of six-week induction followed by three-week maintenance at three, 

six, and 12 months (15 instillations) to a reduced frequency BCG schedule of 
induction at weeks one, two, and six followed by two-weeks (weeks one and three) 
of maintenance at three, six, and 12 months (nine instillations). Following a data 
review and safety analysis, patient accrual was halted as the reduced frequency 
schedule was inferior to the standard schedule regarding the time to first recurrence. 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Bladder neoplasms: Non-muscle invasive 

bladder cancer. Updated March 1, 2021. https://university.auanet.org/core/oncology


adult/bladder-neopIasms-non-muscle-invasive-bladder-cancer/index.cfm 

O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


Chang SS, Boorjian SA, Chou R, et al: Diagnosis and treatment of non-muscle invasive 
bladder cancer: AUA/SUO Guideline. J UROL 2016;196:1021. https://www.auanet.org/

guidelines/guidelines/bladder-cancer-non-muscle-invasive-guideline 

Grimm MO, van der Heijden AG, Colombel M, et al: Treatment of high-grade non


muscle-invasive bladder carcinoma by standard number and dose of BCG instillations 
versus reduced number and standard dose of BCG instillations: Results of the 
European Association of Urology Research Foundation Randomised Phase III Clinical 

Trial "NIMBUS". EUR UROL 2020;78:690-698. 

Question #36 ANSWER=B 

Differential diagnosis in this patient includes chronic pelvic pain syndrome or other 
underlying conditions such as bladder neck obstruction. The information provided 
and the diagnostic studies done to date are notable for diminished flow rate and 
incomplete emptying. The synergistic voiding rules out pelvic floor dysfunction. A 
wide range of studies have documented the prevalence of voiding dysfunction in 
these patients and the value of UDS evaluation, particularly with simultaneous video 
evaluation, in diagnosing bladder neck obstruction and guiding treatment. While 

TRUS, semen culture, and cystoscopy may all be useful in selected patients (when 
indicated by specific elements of the history or examination), there is no indication 
for any of them in this instance. The use of NSAIDS as monotherapy has not proven 

useful. Amitriptyline is a tricyclic antidepressant with both alpha and beta 

sympathomimetic stimulant effects and will actually worsen voiding symptoms in 

patients with bladder neck obstruction. Pelvic floor physiotherapy has not been 

found to be beneficial in patients with primary bladder neck obstruction and use at 
this time in a patient with presumed bladder neck obstruction is costly and 

inappropriate. 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Prostatitis. Updated March 1, 2021. 
https://university.auanet.org/core/uroIogic-infections/prostatitis/index.cfm 

Question #37 ANSWER=B 

This patient has congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens (CBAVD). This is 
mostly associated in men with cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator 
(CFTR) gene mutations. However, this diagnosis can be reached largely on physical 
examination and semen analysis prior to genetic testing. These men will have 

macroscopic semen parameters consistent with a pattern seen with ejaculatory duct 
obstruction, which includes azoospermia, low semen volume (< 1.0 mL), and acidic 

semen pH (< 7.0). They will also have an inability to form a semen coagulum and 
prolonged semen liquefaction. Semen fructose levels are low in men with either 

CBAVD or ejaculatory duct obstruction due to lack of seminal vesicle contribution to 
the semen. The remaining fluid comes from the prostate and peri-urethral glands, 

which is typically acidic and devoid of fructose. 

18 0 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


Turek PJ: Male reproductive physiology, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, 

Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. 

Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 2, chap 64, p 1390. 

Schlegel PN, Sigman M, Collura B, et al: Diagnosis and treatment of infertility in men: 

AUA/ASRM Guideline Part II. J UROL 2021;205:44. 

https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/guidelines/male-infertility 

Question #38 ANSWER=A 

Squamous cell carcinoma of the distal (pendulous) urethra is managed by distal 
urethrectomy and penectomy with the goal of achieving a negative margin. If 
invasive disease involves the proximal penile urethra, total urethrectomy with or 
without penectomy, may be required. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy has not been 
tested except with locally extensive lesions to enhance resectability. For advanced 
distal urethral cancers (T3 +/-N1), chemoradiation has been used with consideration 

of surgical consolidation. The management of the inguinal region is different 

compared to primary penile carcinoma in that prophylactic lymphadenectomy for 
high-grade or high stage primaries without evidence of metastases on exam or 

imaging, is not indicated. Pelvic lymph node dissection is not indicated in the primary 

setting of a distal urethral cancer although it can occasionally be utilized after a 

favorable response to chemotherapy or chemoradiation. 

Anderson CB, McKiernan JM: Tumors of the urethra, in Partin AW, Peters CA, 

Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 

12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 2, chap 80, pp 1778-1779. 
Question #39 ANSWER=C 

5-alpha-reductase inhibitors result in decreased dihydrotestosterone (DHT) and 

semen volume. A variable decrease in sperm concentration and motility may also 

occur. Alpha-blockers lead to relaxation of the bladder neck, resulting in retrograde 

ejaculation or anejaculation and decreased ejaculated semen volume. All of these 

effects are reversible with discontinuation of the medications. Silodosin has a higher 
rate of retrograde ejaculation than tamsulosin. Pseudoephedrine tightens up the 
bladder neck and will not cause reduction of semen volume, although it can be used 
as a treatment for retrograde ejaculation. It would, however, not improve the 
decreased semen parameters induced by finasteride and may worsen his LUTS. 

Imipramine is a sympathomimetic medication that was previously used as an antidepressant. 
It has been used in cases of retrograde ejaculation, but similar to 

pseudoephedrine, would be used only if retrograde ejaculation continues following 
discontinuation of finasteride and tamsulosin (the likely causes in this case). 
Although not offered as an option here, discontinuation of tamsulosin alone could 
also have been considered as a first step. 

O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 19 


Samplaski MK, Nangia A: Adverse effects of common medications on male fertility. 
NAT REV UROL 2015;12:401-413. 

Amory JK, Wang C, Swerdloff RS, et al: The effect of 5-alpha-reductase inhibition 

with dutasteride and finasteride on semen parameters and serum hormones in 

healthy men. J CLIN ENDOCRINOL METAB 2007:92:1659-1665. 

Hellstrom WJ, Sikka SC: Effects of alfuzosin and tamsulosin on sperm parameters in 
healthy men: Results of a short-term, randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled, 

crossover study. J ANDROL 2009:30:469-474. 

Question #40 ANSWER=A 

The patient has a possible UPJ obstruction along with the lower pole stone. He has 
recurrent UTls that may be due to the UPJ, infected urine, and likely an infected 
lower pole stone. Observation is not an option in this case. Since the patient has a 

suspected UPJ obstruction, a diuretic renal scan is needed before initiating a 
treatment option to determine the degree of possible obstruction. Retrograde 
pyelogram is invasive and does not quantify the degree of obstruction. If obstruction 

is confirmed, then a dismembered pyeloplasty with pyelolithotomy to remove the 
lower pole stone is possible. If obstruction does not exist, then ureteroscopy or PCNL 

is an option. With a possible tight UPJ, borderline stone size, along with lower pole 
location, ureteroscopy may require more than one procedure. PCNL would be a 

better option with or without anterograde endopyelotomy, depending on the result 

of the renal scan. 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: UPJ obstruction. Updated March 1, 2021. 

https://university.auanet.org/core/reconstructive-uroIogy/reconstruction-of-upj


obstruction 

Question #41 ANSWER=E 

LH-RH antagonists, like degarelix or abarelix, bind immediately and competitively to 
the LH-RH receptors in the pituitary, significantly reducing LH and serum 

testosterone concentrations by 84% within 24 hours of administration. Hormonally 

naive patients with impending spinal cord compression or severe bone pain may 

uniquely benefit from this class of agents (or surgical orchiectomy). The direct 
antagonistic activity eliminates the testosterone flare which is characteristic of LH-
RH agonists such as leuprolide. Historically, while ketoconazole has been used in this 

setting, the improved toxicity profile of degarelix makes this a better treatment 

option. Likewise, surgical orchiectomy may be utilized in this setting. Enzalutamide 

is a third-generation androgen receptor antagonist but has never been evaluated in 
this clinical setting. Abiraterone acetate is a CYP-17 inhibitor that lowers androgen 

synthesis. Relugolix is an oral GnRH receptor antagonist. All three are oral agents 
and would likely have longer onset of action compared to degarelix and this longer 
onset makes them inferior choices in this patient with presumed spinal cord 

20 O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


compression requiring more urgent treatment. 

Eggener S: Hormonal therapy for prostate cancer, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi 
LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. 

Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, chap 161, p 3676. 

Question #42 ANSWER=E 

The patient has suffered a UPJ disruption following a rapid deceleration injury. 

Absolute indications for renal exploration include expanding/pulsatile hematoma, 
hemodynamic instability, suspected renal pedicle avulsion, and UPJ disruption. 

Exploration is best carried out through a transabdominal approach (not flank) which 
allows for better control of the renal vessels and thorough inspection of the bowel 

and intra-abdominal organs. Observation and minimally invasive approaches such as 

stent or PCNT, with or without perinephric drain, are not indicated in the presence 

of an acute UPJ disruption following blunt trauma. 

Morey AF, Brandes S, Dugi III DD, et at: Urotrauma: AUA Guideline. J UROL 
2014,192:327. https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/guidelines/urotrauma-guideline 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Trauma. Updated February 24, 2021. 

https://university.auanet.org/core/pediatric/pediatric-trauma/index.cfm 

Question #43 ANSWER=B 

This boy has retractile testes which are felt to be due to an overactive cremasteric 

reflex. They are commonly seen in boys between the ages of three to seven. In the 
past, retractile testes were felt to be a variant of normal anatomy and further ascent 

was rare. However, more recent studies have shown that ascent is fairly common 
(ascending testis) and can occur in up to 30-50% of cases. The risk of developing an 
ascending testis is higher in children that present at an older age and those with 
significant tension along the cord structures. There is some data that suggest that 

an ascending testis may have some of the similar histologic findings and decreased 

fertility potential as that of an undescended testis. Thus, close follow-up with annual 
exams is recommended for children with retractile testes until puberty or when 

adequate intrascrotal positioning is well documented. In this patient, surgery is not 

indicated at this time and ultrasound is not adequate to document testis position or 
presence of a hernia. Human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) injections have been 
shown to have some limited efficacy in children with an undescended testis but are 

not appropriate in the setting of a retractile testes since a response to hCG will not 

necessarily change the outcome. Close follow-up is still needed since an initial 

response to hCG may not be permanent. 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Undescended testis. Updated December 24, 

2020. https://university.auanet.org/core/pediatric/undescended-testis/index.cfm 

2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


Question #44 ANSWER=C 

This patient has metastatic RCC (mRCC). Several prognostic models have been 
developed to guide therapy for patients with mRCC, most notably the Memorial 
Sloan Kettering Cancer Center (MKCC) Model and the International Metastatic Renal 
Cell Carcinoma Database Consortium (IMDC) Criteria. Importantly for the patient 

here, both of these models include anemia. In addition, institutional series have 
identified the presence of systemic symptoms as an adverse prognostic factor among 

patients undergoing cytoreductive nephrectomy for mRCC. Further, the presence of 
sarcomatoid features has in particular been associated with an adverse prognosis for 
patients with mRCC. Collectively, therefore, the presence of weight loss, sarcomatoid 
features, as well as abnormal laboratory parameters support an approach to 
management with initial systemic therapy for this patient. This strategy has the 
advantage of facilitating assessment of the disease's responsiveness to systemic 
therapy — termed a “litmus test“ — which may help to select those who might benefit 
from delayed surgical resection. Indeed, the SURTIME trial randomized patients with 
mRCC to initial versus delayed cytoreductive nephrectomy, and, although 

underpowered, reported higher overall survival (albeit as a secondary endpoint of 

the trial) in the deferred nephrectomy arm. Upfront cytoreductive surgery should in 

fact rarely be done in any patient with such features, particularly in the absence of 

local debilitating symptoms such as flank pain and hematuria. The combination of 

the checkpoint inhibitor medications ipilimumab, an antibody that blocks the 

interaction of CTLA-4 with its ligands, and nivolumab, an antibody that blocks the 

interaction between PD-1 with its ligands, was tested in a phase III randomized trial 
(CheckMate 214) versus sunitinib in patients with advanced RCC. The combination of 
ipilimumab and nivolumab demonstrated significantly improved objective response 
rates as well as overall survival. As such, this combination therapy is a preferred 
regimen by the NCCN Guidelines for the first-line treatment of intermediate and 

poor risk patients with metastatic clear cell RCC. While pembrolizumab, an immune 
checkpoint inhibitor, may be utilized in combination with axitinib or lenvatinib for 
patients with newly diagnosed intermediate or poor risk metastatic clear cell RCC, 
pembrolizumab monotherapy is not approved for metastatic RCC. Similarly, while 
avelumab in combination with axitinib represents a first-line treatment option 
(although not a preferred regimen per the NCCN Guidelines) for patients with 
intermediate or poor risk metastatic clear cell RCC, avelumab monotherapy is not 

currently utilized in mRCC. Further, the combination of lenvatinib and everolimus is 
an option for second-line therapy for patients with mRCC; however, treatment with 
this regimen is not recommended in the first-line setting. 

NCCN GUIDELINES, Kidney cancer, 2022. 

Srinivasan R, Linehan WM: Treatment of advanced renal cell carcinoma, in Partin 

AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN 

UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 2, chap 104, p 2324. 

Blum KA, Gupta S, Tickoo SK, et al: Sarcomatoid renal cell carcinoma: biology, natural 
history and management. NAT REV UROL 2020;17:659-678. 

22 Oc 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


McIntosh AG, Umbreit EC, Holland LC, et al: Optimizing patient selection for 
cytoreductive nephrectomy based on outcomes in the contemporary era of systemic 
therapy. CANCER 2020;126:3950-3960. 

Motzer RJ, Tannir NM, McDermott DF, et al: Nivolumab plus ipilimumab versus 

sunitinib in advanced renal-cell carcinoma. NEJM 2018;378:1277-1290. 

Bex A, Mulders P, Jewett M, et al: Comparison of immediate vs deferred 

cytoreductive nephrectomy in patients with synchronous metastatic renal cell 

carcinoma receiving sunitinib: The SURTIME Randomized Clinical Trial. JAMA ONCOL 

2019;5:164-170. 

Question #45 ANSWER=D 

Fowler's syndrome was first described in 1985. It is a cause of urinary retention in 

young women that is associated with abnormally increased EMG activity that results 
in impaired external sphincter relaxation. No neurologic or anatomic abnormality is 
associated with the condition, though it has been noted that women with Fowler's 
syndrome often have polycystic ovaries raising the possibility of a focal hormonal 

role. That said, neither hormone therapy, onabotulinumtoxinA injection, or alpha


blockade have been found to be successful therapies. Interestingly, however, the 
condition has been found by several groups to be highly responsive to 

neuromodulation. Alpha-blockade would relax the bladder neck and smooth muscle 

but would have no effect on the striated muscle of the external sphincter. A 
sphincterotomy would not be indicated for Fowler's syndrome. 

Kowalik CCG, Wein AJ, Dmochowski RR: Neuromuscular dysfunction of the lower 

urinary tract, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): 

CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, 
chap 116, p 2629. 

Question #46 ANSWER=C 

This patient has likely developed metastatic recurrence in the left inguinal region, 
consistent with clinical N1 disease. Since this is a delayed development, the patient 

should have a unilateral superficial and deep inguinal dissection only on the affected 

side. There are no clinical concerns for infection; therefore, antibiotics are not 

indicated. In a patient with palpable nodes (or in the setting of clinically negative 

nodes with a frozen section demonstrating cancer in the superficial nodes), both a 

superficial and deep lymph node dissection should be performed. Chemotherapy is 
not indicated without evidence of distant metastatic and/or unresectable disease. 

Pettaway CA Sr, Crook JM, Pagliaro LC: Tumors of the penis, in Partin AW, Peters CA, 

Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 

12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 2, chap 79, p 1761. 
O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


Question #47 ANSWER=E 

OnabotulinumtoxinA is indicated for neurogenic detrusor overactivity. However, the 

concerning UDS finding that can be seen in many patients with spina bifida, 
including this one, is loss of compliance and an elevated detrusor LPP. Elevated 

detrusor LPP specifically refers to a loss of compliance. A detrusor LPP > 40 cm H2O 

places patients at a greater risk for subsequent upper urinary tract damage. While 
this patient is now continent, that does not mean that his detrusor storage pressure 
is in a safe range and he should, therefore, undergo a repeat UDS. If the detrusor 
pressure is in a safe range at appropriate volumes, then increasing the interval 
between catheterizations can be considered, and he will likely require repeat 

injection in six to nine months when his symptoms return. If the detrusor pressures 

are not appropriately lowered with onabotulinumtoxinA, then bladder 
augmentation should be considered. 

Kowalik CCG, Wein AJ, Dmochowski RR: Neuromuscular dysfunction of the lower 
urinary tract, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): 
CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, 

chap 116, pp 2617-2619. 

Anderson KE: Pharmacologic management of lower urinary tract storage and 
emptying failure, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ 
(eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, 

chap 120, pp 2707-2709. 

Question #48 ANSWER=A 

Devascularization of the upper pole of the kidney can occur during adrenalectomy 
due to inadvertent injury to an unsuspected accessory renal artery or upper pole 

branch of the main renal artery. If the area fed by the injured vessel is small, it can 
be ignored; however, larger injuries may require an attempt at revascularization. As 

the size of the devascularization in this case is small, the patient should be observed. 

All other listed maneuvers would likely be of no benefit to the small devascularized 
segment of renal parenchyma. I.V. fluid or I.V. mannitol to increase renal perfusion 
are incorrect because the arterial supply to the affected part of the kidney has been 
compromised and these measures will not recover arterial inflow. Similarly, I.V. 
heparin will not re-establish severed arterial blood supply. Finally, partial 
nephrectomy is not indicated, as there is no long-term harm caused by a 3 cm 
ischemic area, and the risk outweighs the benefit. 

Lim SK, Rha KH: Surgery of the adrenal glands, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, 
Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. 
Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, chap 107, p 2423. 

O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


Question #49 ANSWER=E 

Current Children's Oncology Group protocols recommend that children ten years of 
age and older should have an ipsilateral RPLND as part of their routine staging prior 
to chemotherapy due to their higher risk of retroperitoneal relapse. All children with 
rhabdomyosarcoma receive chemotherapy, but those older than ten years of age 
should receive a staging RPLND. Patients under age 10 who are clinical N0 may 

receive vincristine and dactinomycin without RPLND. Those with metastatic disease 
or who are clinical N1 will receive additional agents such as cyclophosphamide. XRT 

is reserved for those with pathologically node-positive RPLND. Observation alone is 

not an option for rhabdomyosarcoma. 

Ferrer FA: Pediatric urologic oncology: Bladder and testis, in Partin AW, Peters CA, 

Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 

12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 1, chap 54, p 1126. 
AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Genitourinary oncology. Updated March 30, 
2021. https://university.auanet.org/core/pediatric/genitourinary-pediatric-oncology 

Question #50 ANSWER=C 

Inability to pass a catheter in spite of multiple attempts is an emergency and the 
urologist should get involved early. Difficulty with catherization is often due to a 

narrow stoma at the skin or a tortuous efferent limb that can be more angled with 

a distended pouch. Initial attempts with a straight catheter should be followed by 
use of a 16 Fr Coudé-tip catheter with lots of lubrication. Smaller catheters (14 Fr or 
12 Fr) can also be useful in navigating a narrow stoma or tortuous efferent limb. Use 
of a larger catheter (i.e., 20 Fr as is often used for BPH) will unlikely be helpful. 

Fluoroscopic guidance is also unlikely to aid in cannulation of the efferent limb in 
such cases and would not be utilized in an emergency situation such as this. Likewise, 

if the patient was not in pain and the situation was less urgent, then an attempt at 

endoscopic catheter placement would be a reasonable option. If initial attempts at 
catheterization fail, a helpful step is to drain the distended pouch. This maneuver 
will not only relieve the patient's pain but also may straighten out a kink in the 

efferent limb. This procedure can safely be done percutaneously a few centimeters 
to the right and inferior to the stoma, given that the right colon and small bowel 
usually lie medial to the reservoir. This can be achieved with a long 18-or 16-gauge 
angiocatheter. The use of a spinal needle (for a test pass) and/or bedside ultrasound 
can be utilized if the pouch location remains uncertain. Bilateral PCNT may relieve 
upper tract obstruction but will not necessarily decompress the pouch and avoid the 

possibility of rupture. Open revision is not warranted at this time, and such 

procedures are most often used for narrow stomas or tortuous efferent limbs that 
are refractory to conservative management. Stoma dilation will not solve the 
immediate problem of a distended pouch, and in addition, this patient is able to pass 
the catheter beyond the stoma. The patient should be counseled on compliance with 
a timed catheterization schedule. 

0 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


DeCastro GJ, McKiernan JM, Benson MC: Cutaneous continent urinary diversion, in 

Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL 
WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, chap 

140, pp 3206-3213. 

Skinner EC, Dunn MD: Complications of continent cutaneous diversion Taneja SS 

(ed): COMPLICATIONS OF UROLOGIC SURGERY, ed 4. Philadelphia, Elsevier Saunders, 

2010, chap 47, pp 554-555. 

Question #51 ANSWER=C 

Pelvic lipomatosis is a benign condition of the pelvis associated with deposition of 
mature unencapsulated fat in the retroperitoneal pelvic space producing the typical 
"pear-shaped" appearance of the bladder on CT scan. This condition also causes a 

straightening and tubular appearance of the rectum. It is more common in Black 
men and is associated with obesity and with cystitis glandularis of the bladder in up 
to 40% of cases. The other options (cystitis cystica, cystitis follicularis, nephrogenic 

adenoma, malakoplakia) are not associated with pelvic lipomatosis. 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Bladder neoplasms: Non-muscle invasive 

bladder cancer. Updated March 1, 2021. https://university.auanet.org/core/oncologyadult/
bladder-neopIasms-non-muscle-invasive-bladder-cancer/index.elm 

Kates M, Bivalacqua TJ: Tumors of the bladder, in Partin AW, Dmochowski RR, 

Kavoussi LR, Peters CA (eds): CAMPBELL-WALSH-WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. 
Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol III, chap 135, p 3082. 

Question #52 ANSWER=B 

Lymphadenopathy out of proportion to the size of the renal mass, together with the 

presence of constitutional symptoms and absence of visceral metastases, should raise 
concern that the patient may have a diagnosis of lymphoma. Thus, the next step 
here would be to biopsy a lymph node to establish the histologic diagnosis. The renal 
mass may represent either renal involvement with lymphoma or a separate primary 
renal neoplasm. If the biopsy demonstrates RCC, this would not rule-out the 
presence of concurrent lymphoma; therefore, lymph node biopsy would be the most 
appropriate next step to determine a diagnosis with potentially one test. If the 

patient has lymphoma, this diagnosis should be evaluated and managed prior to 

addressing such a relatively small renal mass in a patient without local symptoms. 
Moreover, per AUA Guidelines, renal mass biopsy should be performed prior to or 
at the time of ablation to provide pathologic diagnosis and guide subsequent

surveillance. 

Campbell SC, Uzzo RG, Karam JA, et al: Renal mass and localized renal cancer: 

Evaluation, management, and follow-up: AUA Guideline: Part II. J UROL 2021;206: 
209. 

26 0 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/guidelines/renal-mass-and-localized-renalcancer-
evaluation-management-and-follow-up 

Campbell SC, Lane BR, Pierorazio PM: Malignant renal tumors, in Partin AW, Peters 

CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, 

ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 2, chap 97, pp 2181-2183. 

Question #53 ANSWER=A 

Ketamine (also known as: K, Special K, Vitamin K, green, and jet) is a tranquilizer 
that will induce a trance-like state while providing pain relief, sedation, and memory 
loss. Heart rate, respiratory function, and airway reflexes will remain functional. 
Ketamine is most commonly used for pain relief in emergency rooms and intensive 
care units and/or sedation at the time of anesthetic induction. It has gained 

popularity as a street drug and has quickly outgrown heroin and methamphetamine 

as the drug of choice in many parts of the world due to its low cost and easy

accessibility. Although ketamine's recreational use initially blossomed in Asia, its use 
has spread worldwide. In a recent survey of New York City clubs, 21% of adults aged

18 to 29 have admitted to using ketamine. In 2015, an estimated 2.3 million adults 

and adolescents in the United States have abused ketamine. Urologists should be 

aware that the chronic use of ketamine can induce ketamine cystitis. Symptoms, 

cystoscopic findings, and biopsy findings are highly consistent with non-Hunner's 

interstitial cystitis, and without the proper history, distinction between the two 
diagnoses is almost impossible. Ketamine cystitis will usually lead to a severely 

fibrotic end-stage bladder that will result in the need for cystectomy. There are, 
however, successful case reports where the fibrosis has been halted or reversed by

the use of intravesical chondroitin sulfate or hyaluronic acid. Tuberculosis of the 

bladder occurs secondary to tuberculosis of the kidney, and, therefore, upper tract 

abnormalities would be expected on CT scan. Malakoplakia typically manifests as 
mucosal plaques or nodules with bladder biopsy demonstrating Michaelis-Gutman 
bodies. Herpes simplex virus infection causes painful ulcers of the genitalia typically 
without bladder involvement. Cytomegalovirus may cause hematuria and urinary 

symptoms but only in immunocompromised individuals. 

Moldwin RM, Hanno PM: Interstitial cystitis/bladder pain syndrome and related 
disorders, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): 

CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 2, chap

57, pp 1235-1236. 

Wood D, Cottrell A, Baker SC, et al: Recreational ketamine: From pleasure to pain. 
BRI J UROL INT 2011;107:1881-1884. 

Chang AH, Blackburn BG, Hsieh M: Tuberculosis and parasitic infections of the 

genitourinary tract, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ 
(eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 2, 

chap 60, pp 1311-1314. 

O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


Borawski KM: Sexually transmitted diseases, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, 
Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. 

Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 2, chap 58, pp 1255-1256. 

Cooper KL, Badalato GM, Rutman MP: Infections of the urinary tract, in Partin AW, 

Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN 
UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 2, chap 55, pp 1179-1181. 

Question #54 ANSWER=D 

The patient has normal ejaculatory volume and mild oligospermia with a total sperm 

count of 48 million and a total motile count of 29 million. Post-ejaculate urinalysis is 

indicated with low volume ejaculates to determine if retrograde ejaculation is 

present. Genetic testing, including karyotype and Y chromosome microdeletion 

analysis, should be ordered with sperm densities lower than 5 million/mL. Since no 

clinical varicoceles or other palpable scrotal abnormalities are noted, scrotal 

ultrasound is not indicated. Intrauterine insemination (IUI) is appropriate with mild 

oligospermia in a young couple. If pregnancy does not occur after several IUIs, 

regular in vitro fertilization may be considered. ICSI is indicated with severe , 

oligospermia. 

Schlegel PN, Sigman M, Collura B, et al: Diagnosis and treatment of infertility in men: 
AUA/ASRM Guideline Part II. J UROL 2021;205:44. 

https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/guidelines/male-infertility 

Question #55 ANSWER=E 

During the use of the argon beam electrocoagulator in a laparoscopic setting, 

intraperitoneal pressure can rapidly increase, resulting in poor tidal volumes and 

compromised ventilation. It is important to release the pneumoperitoneum from one 
of the trocar ports (by "venting") during the use of an argon beam in order to avoid 

over-pressurizing the abdomen with the infused argon gas. If unrecognized, this 
can cause an abrupt increase in intra-abdominal pressure and eventual 

compromise of ventilation. Due to the amount of argon gas used and the resulting 

intra-abdominal pressure, obtaining deeper sedation, adding PEEP, or increasing 
ventilation rate will not help the lungs to clear the argon gas fast enough to mitigate 
the effects of the excessive argon-related increased intra-abdominal pressure. 

Decreasing CO2insufflation rate will not impact intraperitoneal pressure in this 

setting. 

Sourial MW, De SK, Monga M, Knudsen BE: Basic energy modalities in urologic 

surgery, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): 
CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 1, chap15, p 236. 

28 O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


Patel RM, Kaler KS, Landman J: Fundamentals of laparoscopic and robotic urologic 
surgery, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): 
CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 1, chap 

14, p 215.e1. 

Question #56 ANSWER=B 

Men with erectile dysfunction (ED) should be informed regarding the treatment 
option of an FDA-approved oral PDE-5 inhibitor, such as sildenafil, including 
discussion of benefits and risks/burdens unless contraindicated. While diet and 
exercise may improve his erectile function, this will take time, and in some studies, 

up to two years. Treatment with PDE-5 inhibitors will be the most expeditious way 

of addressing his issue. Clomiphene citrate is an estrogen blocker and increases 

endogenous testosterone levels. Testosterone therapy is not considered first-line 

therapy for ED. Thus, neither clomiphene citrate nor testosterone cypionate are 
indicated in this scenario. Although not offered as an option here, if a man with ED 
has testosterone deficiency (< 300 ng/dL), he should be informed that combination 
therapy with testosterone and PDE-5 inhibitors may be more efficacious. 

Burnett AL II, Ramasamy R: Evaluation and management of erectile dysfunction, in 

Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL 

WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 2, chap 69, p 1513. 

Burnett AL, Nehra A, Breau RH, et al: Erectile dysfunction: AUA Guideline. J UROL 

2018;200:633. https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/guidelines/erectile-dysfunction


(ed)-guideline 

Question #57 ANSWER=D 

The prone position was described by Goodwin and colleagues (1955) for 
percutaneous access to the upper urinary tract collecting system, and over time this 

position became standard. lt has the advantage of presenting a large surface area 
(the patient's back) that provides many choices of access sites and a stable horizontal 

working surface. The posterior or posterolateral approach is the most direct one to 

the desirable posterior calyces and cornes closest to approaching the kidney through 

Brödel's avascular line. Prone positioning does have some disadvantages. lt is 

associated with a decrease in cardiac index and can also be associated with decreased 

pulmonary capacity. The anesthesiologist has poor access to the airway with the 

patient in the prone position, and prone positioning might not be possible in 
patients with morbid obesity. For the present scenario, acetohydroxamic acid should 

only be used if surgical therapy is not possible. Given the infected and staghorn 

nature of the stone, ureteroscopy will be less optimal for complete stone clearance. 
Supine PCNL is preferred if the patient cannot tolerate the prone position, as in the 

present scenario, and is the correct choice. There are several different ways to 
position a patient for a supine PCNL; all of the various scenarios allow for access to 

the kidney along the mid-axillary line. Prone positioning and increasing positive end 

Ô 2022 American Urological Association. AII Rights Reserved. 


expiratory pressure for the entire procedure is not the safest approach in a patient 

who suffers increased airway pressures on initial prone positioning. Robotic 
anatrophic nephrolithotomy has been reported, however has potential for increased 
morbidity, particularly in this morbidly obese patient and increased loss of renal 
function. Therefore, it is still considered a second-line approach if PCNL is not 
technically feasible (approach to kidney was unsafe secondary to renal 

anatomy/surrounding structures or stone was more complex in nature). 

Assimos D, Krambeck A, Miller NL et al: Surgical management of stones: 
AUA/Endourological Society Guideline, part II. J UROL 2016;196:1161. 
https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/kidney-stones-surgical-management-guideline 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Surgical treatment. Updated March 30, 2021. 
https://university.auanet.org/core/urolithiasis/surgical-stone-disease/index.cfm 

Leavitt DA, de la Rosette JJMCH, Hoenig DM: Strategies for nonmedical 

management of upper urinary tract calculi, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, 
Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. 

Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 2, chap 93, p 2089. 

Matlaga BR, Krambeck AE: Surgical management for upper urinary tract calculi, in 

Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL 
WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 2, chap 94, p 2106. 

Question #58 ANSWER=B 

This patient has a circumferential urethral prolapse with normal-appearing mucosa. 
The most common symptom of urethral prolapse is vaginal bleeding/spotting with 

wiping, and voiding symptoms may be present as well. The primary treatment is 
vaginal estrogen cream. However, in a post-menopausal woman with a uterus, a 
transvaginal ultrasound should be obtained first to rule out endometrial pathology 
as a cause for post-menopausal bleeding. Ultrasound is indicated as initial imaging 
of the uterus, though a pelvic MRI scan might be a necessary follow-up exam if there 
are abnormal findings. Malignancy is rarely associated with urethral prolapse, but 

biopsy should be considered if the diagnosis is uncertain. In this patient with normal


appearing mucosal prolapse, a biopsy would not be indicated unless additional 
features of her exam were concerning. In patients presenting with refractory 
bleeding or pain, thrombosed or obstructing lesions, earlier surgical excision can be 
considered versus a trial of vaginal estrogen cream. 

Hall ME, Oyesanya T, Cameron AP: Results of surgical excision of urethral prolapse in 

symptomatic patients. NEUROLOGY AND URODYNAMICS. 2017;36:2049-2055. 

Cox L, Rovner ES: Bladder and female urethral diverticula, in Partin AW, Peters CA, 
Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 

12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, chap 130, p 2964. 
O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


Question #59 ANSWER=A 

The management of testicular cancer involves close monitoring of serum tumor 

markers such as AFP and beta-hCG. Beta-hCG levels are elevated in 20-40% of low


stage non-seminomas and 40-60% of advanced NSGCT. Additionally, approximately 

15-20% of seminomas secrete beta-hCG. The half-life of beta-hCG is 24-36 hours. 

Consequently, monitoring beta-hCG after the removal of the primary tumor is 

essential in the initial management of testicular tumors. Immunoassays for hCG are 

directed at the beta-subunit, and thus there can be some cross-reactivity with LH. 
This cross-reactivity may lead to false-positive hCG elevations in patients with 

primary hypogonadism. False elevations will normalize within 48-72 hours after the 
administration of testosterone. In this patient who has now been rendered anorchid 
by removal of a solitary testicle, the elevated hCG might be due to this crossreactivity 
to LH. In the setting of negative preoperative metastatic studies, it will be 

quite rare to have progressive disease. Consequently, the administration of 
exogenous testosterone and a repeat marker test is the correct next step in this case. 
Immediate treatment with either carboplatin, BEP, or XRT is not indicated until 
clarification of the source and cause of the mild elevation of his hCG and 
documentation of the need for active treatment. Repeat imaging this soon after 
surgery is not necessary unless the tumor marker elevation is ascertained to be tumor 

related. PET-CT scan is not indicated in seminoma prior to chemotherapy. Brain MRI 
scan is not indicated unless tumor marker elevation is documented to be of tumor 

origin. If he has elevation of hCG due to tumor, then it wou(d change his primary 

management. 

Stephenson AJ, Gilligan TD: Neoplasms of the testis, in Partin AW, Peters CA, 
Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 

12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 2, chap 76, p 1686. 
Question #60 ANSWER=D 

VCUG is recommended if there is evidence of renal scarring on ultrasound or a 
history of UTI in the sibling who has not been tested. VCUG is recommended for 
children with high-grade (Society of Fetal Urology grade 3 and 4) hydronephrosis 
(not just pelviectasis), hydroureter, an abnormal bladder on ultrasound (late-term 
prenatal or postnatal), or who develop a UTI. VCUG is not routinely recommended 

for all siblings of a child with VUR or for the offspring of a former patient with VUR. 

Peters CA, Skoog SJ, Arant BS, et al: Management and screening of primary 
vesicoureteral reflux in children: AUA GUIDELINE (2010, amended 2017).

https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/guidelines/vesicoureteral-reflux-guideline 

Question #61 ANSWER=D 

The intensity of radiation is inversely proportional to the square of the distance from 

O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


the source. This is known as the "inverse Square Law" and is important for clinicians 

who use ionizing radiation. In short, by doubling the distance away from the x-ray 

source, the radiation exposure is reduced four-fold so that radiation exposure is one


fourth the original value. Such a maneuver is one of the most effective techniques 
to reduce radiation exposure during fluoroscopic procedures. 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Radiation safety. Updated March 19, 2021. 

https://university.auanet.org/core/uroradioIogy/radiation-safety/index.cfm 

Question #62 ANSWER=E 

This five-year-old boy has a 3 cm distal right ureteral calculus that is relatively 

asymptomatic. Although there is no associated hydronephrosis or ureteral dilation, 
a large stone of this size is unlikely to pass spontaneously. Observation would not be 
an option. The size and location of the calculus in this boy make SWL and endoscopic 
approaches difficult and unlikely to be successful in achieving a stone-free state. In 
addition, there would be a significant risk of retained stone fragment(s) and/or 
ureteral injury with either of these modalities. Open ureterolithotomy via lower 

abdominal muscle splitting (Gibson) incision or laparoscopic/robotic 

ureterolithotomy would be most likely to achieve a stone-free state, least likely to 

cause a complication, such as ureteral stricture, and would also allow inspection of 
the distal ureter for any anatomical abnormality predisposing to stone formation in 

this location. 

Matlaga BR, Krambeck AE: Surgical management for upper urinary tract calculi, in 

Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL 

WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 2, chap 94, p 2113. 

Question #63 ANSWER=B 

The outcomes of hand-assisted laparoscopic donor nephrectomy are, in general, 

comparable to the pure laparoscopic approach with regards to acute and long-term 
allograft function, operative times, length of hospital stay, estimated blood loss, and 
overall complication rates. However, the most consistent advantage appears to be a 
shorter warm ischemia time due to more direct means of specimen extraction as a 
result of the hand-port device. Nevertheless, the true clinical benefit of this 
advantage remains uncertain. 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Renal transplant. Updated February 24, 2021. 
https://university.auanet.org/core/renal-transplant/renal-transplant/index.cfm 

Lucas SM, Liaw A, Mhapsekar R, et al: Comparison of donor, and early and late 

recipient outcomes following hand assisted and laparoscopic donor nephrectomy. 

J UROL 2013;189:618-622. 

32 Oc 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


Question #64 ANSWER=C 

In patients with a high likelihood of metastatic disease, every effort must be made 
to rule out distant disease prior to local therapy. Bone scan can have a false positive 
finding due to a history of bone fractures, trauma, surgery, degenerative disease, or 

arthritis. Conversely, plain films can have a false negative test due to the limited 

sensitivity of plain radiography. In this patient, CT or MRI scan would further clarify 
the cause of radionucleotide uptake and confirm or reject the presence of metastatic 
disease before proceeding with therapy. Proceeding directly to surgery or XRT in 
these patients would risk overtreatment of the primary in the setting of metastasis. 

While other radioisotopes used for PET imaging have proved useful in staging of 
prostate cancer (i.e., fluciclovine or PSMA-based imaging), FDG-PET is not useful in 
prostate cancer. Bone biopsy would also not be necessary when other imaging 
modalities could address this situation. ADT with follow-up bone scan may show 

regression of activity of this area if there were metastasis at the site; however, this 

would delay therapy in a potential false positive bone scan. 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Prostate cancer: Advanced disease. Updated 
January 21, 2021. https://university.auanet.org/core/oncology-aduIt/prostate-cancer


advanced-disease/index.cfm 

Question #65 ANSWER=C 

Common side effects of oral oxybutynin are constipation, dry mouth, blurred vision, 

reduced sweating, facial flushing, and neurologic side effects such as altered 
sensorium and behavior changes. These are thought to be due to hepatic 

metabolism of oxybutynin to desethyloxybutynin, which is responsible for these side 
effects. This can be mitigated with either intravesical or transdermal administration 

of the drug with equal efficacy. The side effects related to oral oxybutynin will not 
usually improve with time, so additional therapy with hopes for improvement is not 

reasonable. Oral imipramine as a solo therapy does not provide similar benefits as 
aggressive oxybutynin therapy. Intradetrusor onabotulinumtoxinA injections have 
been shown to be beneficial in pediatric LUTS dysfunction but may not provide longterm 
benefits and may commit the child to multiple endoscopic procedures under 
anesthesia. Augmentation cystoplasty would be an option only in the face of failure 
of the non-surgical options listed. Treatment of constipation alone is unlikely to 
resolve LUTS in a child with a neurogenic bladder. 

Austin PF, Seth A: Functional disorders of the lower urinary tract in children, in Partin 

AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN 

UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 1, chap 35, p 657. 

Question #66 ANSWER=B 

The cutaneous innervation of the scrotum is from both the ilioinguinal and the 

O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


genital branch of the genitofemoral nerve. The ilioinguinal nerve innervates the 
anterior scrotum and the mons pubis. The genital branch of the genitofemoral nerve 
innervates the anterior scrotum and the medial thigh. The posterior femoral 
cutaneous branch of the sacral plexus innervates the posterior aspect of the scrotum. 
The iliohypogastric nerve provides motor supply to the internal oblique and 
transversalis muscle and sensory innervation to the lower abdominal wall. 

Palmer DA, Moinzadeh A: Surgical, radiographic, and endoscopic anatomy of the 

retroperitoneum, in Wein AJ Kavoussi LR, Novick AC, Partin AW, Peters CA (eds): 
CAMPBELL-WALSH UROLOGY, ed 11. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2015, vol 1, 

chap 33, p 780. 

Question #67 ANSWER=C 

In the recovery area, the outputs from the pelvic drain and urethral catheter (and 
suprapubic tube, if present) are monitored. In addition, it is routine to verify the 
hematocrit. If significant hemorrhage is noted, the urethral catheter may be placed 

on traction so that the balloon containing 50 mL of saline can compress the bladder 
neck and prostatic fossa. Constant and reliable traction can be maintained by 

securing the catheter to the abdomen or thigh. In addition, continuous bladder 

irrigation can be initiated to prevent clot formation. For most patients, these 
measures are adequate and effective. However, if excessive bleeding persists after 
these measures, the urethral catheter can be removed in the operating room and a 

cystoscopic inspection of the prostatic fossa and bladder neck can be performed to 
identify and fulgurate discrete bleeding sites. If marked hemorrhage should 

continue to persist, re-exploration should be strongly considered. Exchanging the 
catheter should be avoided and would only be considered if the catheter is not 
draining despite manual irrigation. 

Han M, Partin AW: Simple prostatectomy: Open and robotic-assisted laparoscopic 

approaches, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): 

CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, 

chap 147, p 3454. 

Question #68 ANSWER=A 

Germ cell neoplasia in situ (GCNIS) can be diagnosed by testicular biopsy performed 
for the investigation of infertility. The rationale for treatment of GCNIS is based on 
the relatively high risk of the eventual development of an invasive germ cell tumor 
(50% of men with GCNIS develop invasive GCT within five years). Treatment options 
include orchiectomy, low-dose XRT, and close observation. Platinum-based 
chemotherapy is not effective against GCNIS, as -30% (with cisplatin) and -70% 

(with carboplatin) of patients still have GCNIS after receiving chemotherapy. Biopsy 

of the contralateral testicle will not affect management as the patient is already 

known to have GCNIS in the index testicle. The choice of therapy should be 
individualized based on the patient's desire for future paternity, the presence or 

Oc 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


absence of a normal contralateral testis, and the patient's desire to avoid 

testosterone replacement therapy. Radical orchiectomy is the most definitive 

treatment, although low-dose radiotherapy (20 Gy) is associated with similar rates 

of local control with the prospect of preserving testicular endocrine function owing 

to the relative radioresistance of Leydig cells compared with germinal epithelium. 

For patients with abnormal semen parameters but sufficient for assisted 

reproductive techniques, surveillance with periodic ultrasound evaluation of the 

testis is a reasonable strategy with deferred therapy until successful pregnancy 
and/or development of GCT. While XRT may be effective for cancer control, scatter 

from XRT to the contralateral testis may impair spermatogenesis. While left radical 
orchiectomy is the most definitive treatment, it should not be recommended as the 
first option in patients who prioritize fertility and testicular androgen production. 
However, it should be recommended as the first option in those patients who 
prioritize reduction in cancer risk. 

Stephenson AJ, Gilligan TD: Neoplasms of the testis, in Partin AW, Peters CA, 

Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 

12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 2, chap 76, p 1692. 
Stephenson A, Eggener SE, Bass EB, et al: Diagnosis and treatment of early stage 

testicular cancer: AUA Guideline. J UROL 2019;202:272. 

https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/guidelines/testicular-cancer-guideline 

Question #69 ANSWER=C 

The axis of the ectopic kidney is slightly medial or vertical, but it may be tilted as 

much as 90 degrees laterally so that it lies in a true horizontal plane. The renal pelvis 
is usually anterior (instead of medial) to the parenchyma because the kidney has 

incompletely rotated. As a result, 56% of ectopic kidneys have a hydronephrotic 
collecting system. Half of these cases are a result of obstruction of the ureteropelvic 
or ureterovesical junction (70% and 30%, respectively), 25% from VUR grade 3 or 

greater, and 25% from the malrotation alone. VUR has been found in 30% of 
children with ectopic kidneys. The length of the ureter usually conforms to the 
position of the kidney; the ureter is occasionally slightly tortuous, but it is rarely 
redundant. The ureter usually enters the bladder on the ipsilateral side with its 

orifice positioned normally, except for those unusual cases with ectopic ureters. The 
arterial and venous network is anomalous, and its vascular pattern depends on the 

ultimate position of the kidney. There may be one or two main renal arteries arising 
from the distal aorta or from the aortic bifurcation, with one or more aberrant 

arteries emanating from the common or external iliac or even the inferior mesenteric 

artery. The kidney may be supplied entirely by multiple anomalous branches, none 

of which arise from the aorta. In no instance has the main renal artery arisen from 
the level of the aorta that would be its proper origin if the kidney were positioned 

normally. 

O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


VanderBrink BA, Reddy PP: Anomalies of the upper urinary tract, in Partin AW, 
Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN 
UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 1, chap 38, p 714. 

Question #70 ANSWER=B 

Renal ultrasound is the initial imaging choice for pregnant women, as it does not 

expose them to ionizing radiation. In the present scenario, where a stone is 
suspected but cannot be confirmed on ultrasound, further imaging is recommended. 
The radiation exposure of a low dose CT scan is similar to that achieved with a limited 
IVP and does not expose the patient to I.V. contrast material. Furthermore, the 

American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists state that an indicated imaging 
study should not be withheld on the basis of pregnancy. KUB can provide limited 
data and will not be as useful as a low dose CT scan in this clinical scenario. Ureteral 
stent, ureteroscopy, and PCNT are all reasonable treatments for patients with 
obstructing stones; however, in the present scenario, the diagnosis of a stone has 

not yet been confirmed. 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Surgical treatment. Updated March 30, 2021. 

https://university.auanet.org/core/urolithiasis/surgical-stone-disease/index.cfm 

Kaufman MR: Urologic considerations in pregnancy, in Partin AW, Peters CA, 

Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 

12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 1, chap 18, pp 286-288. 
Question #71 ANSWER=A 

This patient has had upper tract urothelial carcinoma at a young age. Patients less 

than 55 years old who are diagnosed with upper tract urothelial carcinoma should 
be strongly considered for genetic counseling and/or testing for Lynch syndrome. 

Lynch syndrome is caused by a germline mutation in one of the DNA damage repair 
genes, such as MLH1, MSH2, MSH6, and PMS2. In addition to upper tract urothelial 

carcinoma, this familial cancer syndrome is characterized by increased risk of 

developing malignancies of the colon, pancreas, ovary, stomach, and uterus at an 

early age. In this patient with low-grade pTa disease, the addition of blue light to 

cystoscopy of the bladder is unlikely to be of significant benefit. Similarly, at three


month follow-up there is no need to perform a CT-urogram or chest X-ray since the 
patient had low-grade Ta disease and the risk of metastatic disease is very low. Urine 

cytology is discouraged for follow-up of low-risk non-muscle invasive bladder cancer 
based on the most recent AUA Guideline on Non-muscle Invasive Bladder Cancer. 

Low risk, as defined in the AUA Guideline, includes those patients with an initial, 
solitary, low-grade Ta urothelial carcinoma of the bladder. Although this patient has 
upper tract urothelial carcinoma, urine cytology is unlikely to be beneficial in this 

patient. 

36 Oc 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


Kallidonis P, Liatsikos E: Urothelial tumors of the upper urinary tract and ureter, in 

Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL 

WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 2, chap 98, p 2185. 

Chang SS, Boorjian SA, Chou R, et al: Diagnosis and treatment of non-muscle invasive 
bladder cancer: AUA/SUO Guideline. J UROL 2016;J 96:1021. https://www.auanet.org/

guidelines/guidelines/bladder-cancer-non-muscle-invasive-guideline 

Question #72 ANSWER=D 

This patient has started a post-obstructive diuresis from relief of an obstructed 
reimplant in a solitary kidney. Excess free water that had been retained results in 
hyponatremia and should now be excreted allowing the serum sodium to rise, not 

fall. The chloride level will likely follow sodium changes and rise. The acidosis should 

also improve with relief of the obstruction in the solitary kidney. The potassium level 
is normal as the diuresis begins, which is likely due to the patient's I.V. fluid 

containing no potassium, and his oral potassium intake has likely been minimal since 
surgery as well. The diuresis will cause increased potassium losses in the urine due to 

obligate excretion of potassium and there will also be intracellular shift of potassium 

ions as the acidosis corrects. Both of these put the patient at substantial risk for 

significant hypokalemia. Potassium replacement should likely be started once the 

diuresis is underway. Serum magnesium and calcium may decrease with 

postobstructive diuresis but does not decrease as much as potassium. 

Peters CA, Meldrum KK: Pathophysiology of urinary tract obstruction, in Partin AW, 

Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN 

UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 1, chap 40, p 796. 

Question#73 ANSWER=A 

This boy has high-grade VUR into the lower pole of a duplicated system. The reduced 

renal function that is seen on the renal scan is likely secondary to renal dysplasia. 

Renal dysplasia is not unique to primary isolated VUR but may also occur in a variety 

of urologic settings. Duplex renal moieties, prune-belly syndrome, and PUVs may all 

exhibit reflux-associated renal dysmorphism, particularly when the grade of VUR has 
been high. The incidence of a concomitant UPJ obstruction in patients with VUR 
ranges from 1-5%, with the incidence being on the higher end in children with high


grade VUR. When significant hydronephrosis is seen in patients with VUR, one may 

suspect a UPJ obstruction. However, the hydronephrosis is usually secondary to the 

VUR as opposed to an obstructive defect. Three radiologic signs on a VCUG that 

might suggest the existence of UPJ obstruction in the setting of VUR are: 1) if the 
pelvis shows little or no filling of contrast whereas the ureter is filled with contrast; 

2) contrast that does enter into the pelvis is poorly visualized because of dilution of 
the contrast in a large amount of retained urine; 3) poor drainage of retained 

contrast in the renal pelvis is seen on a drainage film. In this patient, none of these 

signs are present; thus, UPJ obstruction is very unlikely. In this boy, there is no 

O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


dilution of the contrast in the pelvis on the VCUG. The delay that is noted on the 
drainage portion of the renal scan is more likely due to reduced renal function, as 
opposed to obstruction. In addition, drainage times on diuresis renography have not 
been found to directly correlate with obstruction in children. With no clear evidence 
of obstruction, surgery to promote drainage by either pyeloplasty or 

ureteropyelostomy would not be appropriate at this time. Lower pole nephrectomy 

is also not indicated at this age after one UTI. The next best course of action in this 

boy is to observe him on prophylactic antibiotics. Ureteral reimplantation would be 

too premature in this setting, especially in light of the patient's young age and the 

size of his bladder. 

Khoury AE, Wehbi E: Management strategies for vesicoureteral reflux, in Partin AW, 

Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN 
UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 1, chap 29, p 499. 

Question #74 ANSWER=A 

The vas deferens extends from the distal end of the cauda epididymis. The vas 

deferens travels posteriorly along the spermatic cord, behind the vessels in the cord. 

The vas deferens passes through the inguinal canal and enters the pelvis lateral to 
the epigastric vessels. On entering the pelvis, after passing through the internal 
inguinal ring, the vas deferens separates from the testicular vessels. The vas deferens 
ultimately reaches the posterior base of the prostate after traveling anterior to the 

ureter and medial to the pelvic sidewall. 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Testis, epididymis, vas deferens. Updated 
March 1, 2021. https://university.auanet.org/core/anatomy-physiology/testis


epididymis-vas-deferens/index.cfm 

Question #75 ANSWER=B 

Hormone therapy should not be altered until after the orchiectomy and should be 
performed by a provider trained in transgender endocrine management. Sperm 

cryopreservation, either through providing a semen sample or testicular biopsy, 
should be offered to all male to female transgender patients. The patient should 

have been living as a woman for at least a year in order to experience and socially 

adjust to their desired gender role (i.e., holidays, various clothing requirements, etc.). 
It is unethical to deny surgery strictly on the basis of seropositivity for HIV, Hepatitis 
B or C. Orchiectomy for gender dysphoria is part of the patient's treatment, and thus 

is not considered elective. There are several additional reasons for consideration of 

orchiectomy in transgender patients including: reduction of testosterone, allowing 

for discontinuation of spironolactone (which has untoward side effects), and the 

psychological impact of the presence of testes. 

WPATH: Standards of care for the health of transsexual, transgender, and gender


nonconforming people. 2012; pp 55-61. https://www.wpath.org/publications/soc 

O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Hormone, medical management and pre


surgery preparation. Updated February 10, 2021. https://university.auanet.org/core/

care-of-transgender-and-gender-non-confirming-patients/transgender-hormonemedical-
management-and-pre-surgery-preparation-of-the-transgender-patient 

Question #76 ANSWER=E 

The radiation dose from a low dose non-contrast CT scan is well below 0.05 Gy (5 

rads). Below this limit, non-cancer health effects of radiation such as fetal demise, 
intrauterine growth retardation, and intellectual disability are not observed at any 

embryonic/fetal developmental stage. These effects, however, are seen at higher 

doses. Stochastic effects, such as cancer risk, do not require a threshold dose and are 

thought to be possible at even low doses of radiation. In general, increased radiation 
correlates with increased cancer risk. Childhood cancer risk and lifetime cancer risk 
is slightly increased with this low level of exposure. 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Radiation safety. Updated March 19, 2021. 
https://university.auanet.org/core/uroradioIogy/radiation-safety/index.elm 

Question #77 ANSWER=D 

The laser fiber is a 600-micron side-firing probe and the energy that is produced by 

the fiber is directed at a 70-degree angle to the fiber longitudinal axis. No end-firing 
probes are available. Sequential vaporization occurs by sweeping the fiber along the 

prostate parenchyma from the inside out. A firing distance that is too close to the 

gland may lead to “contact vaporization” and damage the laser fiber, while a 

distance that is too far away from the gland may result in inefficient energy use with 

more tissue coagulation. Subsequently, there may be an increase in postoperative 

storage LUTS. If apposed or "kissing" lateral lobes are encountered at the beginning 

of the case, lower power (80W) should be used to minimize fiber damage. Likewise, 

a lower power setting may be used to create a single midline incision of the prostate 
or two incisions at the five o'clock and seven o'clock positions. This maneuver would 
allow for the bladder neck to "spring" open and level the prostate fossa with the 
trigone. Typically, these modifications would enable safe completion of the PVP case 

without immediately switching to TURP. If visualization is poor due to decreased 
inflow because of obstructing prostate tissue, a suprapubic tube can be used to 

improve inflow and visualization but is usually not the initial step when "kissing" 

lateral lobes are encountered. 

Helo S, Welliver RC Jr, McVary KT: Minimally invasive and endoscopic management 
of benign prostatic hyperplasia, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski 
RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 

2020, vol 3, chap 146, p 3439. 

O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 39 


Question #78 ANSWER=A 

Nephrogenic rests are a foci of abnormally persistent nephrogenic cells that can be 

a precursor to a Wilms' tumor. They are found in 1% of infants undergoing 

postmortem evaluations, in 4% of multicystic dysplastic kidneys, and in 30-40% of 

kidneys removed for Wilms' tumor. Multiple nephrogenic rests found in the kidney 

undergoing resection for a Wilms’ tumor implies that a similar anomaly is present in 

the contralateral kidney. The finding of numerous nephrogenic rests in the resected 

kidney is therefore associated with an increased risk of the contralateral kidney 

developing a metachronous Wilms' tumor, especially in infants less than one year of 

age. Patients found to have numerous nephrogenic rests in the resected kidney 

should undergo ultrasound surveillance of the contralateral kidney at three-month 

intervals for five years or until age seven whichever comes first. In the absence of 

nephrogenic rests, the follow-up is significantly less frequent due to a lower risk of 

metachronous tumor. There is no role for biopsy or XRT in this patient at this time. 

Ferrer FA: Pediatric urologic oncology: Bladder and testis, in Partin AW, Peters CA, 

Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 

12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 1, chap 54, pp 1100-1101. 
Question #79 ANSWER=C 

The uroflow shows a classic staccato pattern of flow. This may indicate detrusor 

underactivity or bladder outlet obstruction. UDS should help clarify obstruction 

versus detrusor underactivity. Antimuscarinics would not be advised in the setting of 

incomplete emptying with possible outlet obstruction or with detrusor underactivity. 

CIC may help improve these symptoms in patients with elevated PVRs, however, this 

would be considered after urodynamic diagnosis of detrusor underactivity is 

confirmed. A pessary trial would be beneficial for prolapse or SUI, which she does 

not have. A sling incision may be indicated if bladder outlet obstruction is confirmed 

on UDS or there is a clear temporal relationship of the sling placement to the onset 

of her symptoms. 

Chapple CR, Osman NI: The underactive detrusor, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi 

LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. 

Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, chap 118, p 2650. 

Gomelsky A, Dmochowski RR: Slings: Autologous, biologic, synthetic, and mid


urethral, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): 

CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, 

chap 125, p 2830. 

Question #80 ANSWER=B 

The patient has multiple and recurrent Ta low-grade urothelial cancers; thus, she is 

40 O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


at increased risk for further recurrences. According to the AUA/SUO Guideline on 

non-muscle invasive bladder cancer, a patient with an intermediate risk bladder 

cancer should receive either chemotherapy or immunotherapy with consideration of 

maintenance therapy if the patient has a complete response. Therefore, observation 
with cystoscopy in three months would not be appropriate management. This 
patient is on infliximab, a disease-modifying drug for her Crohn's disease. lnfliximab 

and all anti-TNF alpha-monoclonal antibodies carry black box warnings about 
reactivation of tuberculosis; thus, these patients are not optimal candidates for BCG 

therapy. Given her multiple recurrences in a six-month period, additional treatment 

(i.e., vs. cystoscopy alone in three months) is warranted. The treatment course that 

is likely to be most effective is weekly instillations of mitomycin C for six weeks, 

followed by maintenance therapy. Consideration should also be given to changing 

the therapy of her Crohn's disease from an anti-TNF inhibitor, as these have been 

reported to increase the risk of malignancy, although these are primarily 
lymphoproliferative malignancies as opposed to solid tumors. It is premature to 

consider cystectomy in this patient with low-grade disease. 

Zabell J, Konety BR: Management strategies for non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer 

(Ta, T1 and CIS), in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): 
CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, 
chap 136, pp 3103-3105. 

Chang SS, Boorjian SA, Chou R, et al: Diagnosis and treatment of non-muscle invasive 

bladder cancer: AUA/SUO Guideline. J UROL 2016;196:1021. https://www.auanet.org/

guidelines/guidelines/bladder-cancer-non-muscle-invasive-guideline 

Malmstrom PU, Sylvester RJ, Crawford DE, et al: An individual patient data meta


analysis of the long-term outcome of randomised studies comparing intravesical 
mitomycin C versus bacillus Calmette-Guerin for non-muscle-invasive bladder cancer. 
EUR UROL 2009;56:247-256. 

https://www.accessdata.fda.gov/drugsatfda_docs/label/2013/103772s5359IbI.pdf 

Question #81 ANSWER=A 

The best treatment of prostate cancer is determined by grade, stage, estimated 
longevity, and patient preference. Low-risk prostate cancer should not be considered 

a contraindication to transplantation because, in most cases, the morbidity and 

mortality of having ESRD is greater. Patients with low-risk disease felt to be 
amenable to active surveillance should be considered candidates for transplantation 
as long as they adhere to their surveillance regimen. Deferring for one year is not 

necessary. Further work-up with MRI scan, hormonal suppression, or treatment with 
XRT or prostatectomy is not indicated with the low PSA and grade. 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Renal transplant. Updated February 24, 2021. 
https://university.auanet.org/core/renal-transplant/renal-transplant/index.cfm 

O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


Al-Adra DP, Hammel L, Roberts J, et al: Pretransplant solid organ malignancy and 
organ transplant candidacy: A consensus expert opinion statement. AM J 
TRANSPLANT 2021;21:460-474. 

Question #82 ANSWER=A 

Contrast extravasation on CT in the setting of acute obstruction indicates urothelial 
mucosal disruption at the caliceal fornices or urine flow through the mucosa as a 

result of increased hydrostatic pressure. Characteristic CT findings include 

perinephric stranding and fluid surrounding the renal pelvis or demarcating the 
lateral border of the psoas muscle. Forniceal rupture decompresses the collecting 

system and carries no adverse prognosis. A trial of expectant management is 
warranted, therefore, there is no acute indication to proceed to ureteral stent 

placement, PCNT, or ureteroscopy. There are no signs of infection, so antibiotics are 

not indicated. Medical expulsion therapy is controversial; however, recent studies 

have found it to be most useful for stones > 4 mm in the distal ureter. 

Assimos D, Krambeck A, Miller NL et al: Surgical management of stones: 

AUA/Endourological Society Guideline, Part II. J UROL 2016;196:1161. 

https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/kidney-stones-surgical-management-guideline 

Question #83 ANSWER=A 

Patients with Peyronie's disease who are undergoing intralesional therapies should 
be counseled prior to beginning treatment about potential adverse events, including 
sinusitis, flu-like symptoms, and minor penile swelling. Unlike collagenase 

clostridium histolyticum, intralesional interferon has not been specifically FDA


approved for use in patients with Peyronie's disease. However, the AUA Guidelines 

on Peyronie's disease lists this option among the available treatments and indicates 

that clinicians may administer intralesional interferon alpha-2b to patients with 

Peyronie's disease. Patients receiving intralesional interferon should be counseled 
that from 40 to 100% of patients can experience sinusitis, flu-like symptoms of fever, 

chills, and arthralgia as well as minor penile swelling with ecchymosis. Since this 
patient is having anticipated routine side effects, there is no indication at this time 

for blood cultures and antibiotics. These symptoms should not last longer than 48 

hours and may be effectively treated with over-the-counter NSAIDS that can also be 

started empirically prior to injection. The AUA Guidelines Panel on Peyronie's disease 

also recommend use of oral hydration as a helpful measure to mitigate these 

symptoms. The symptoms are typically transient and there is no need to delay the 

next injection or switch to another agent at this early stage in treatment. There is no 

role for topical corticosteroids or antibiotics in this commonly encountered clinical 

scenario. The SHIM score of 24 is consistent with mild erectile dysfunction and there 
is no reason to undergo penile prosthesis surgery before completing the course of 

conservative intralesional therapy. 

O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


Nehra A, Alterowitz R, Culkin DJ, et al: Peyronie's disease: AUA Guideline. J UROL 

2015;194:745. 

https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/guidelines/peyronies-disease-guideline 

AUAUNIVERSITYCORE CURRICULUM:Peyronie's disease: Medical treatment. 
Updated March 1, 2021. https://university.auanet.org/core/sexual-medicineandrology/
peyronies-disease-medical-treatment/index.cfm 

Question #84 ANSWER=C 

The BPH6 study compared prostatic urethral lift (PUL; UroLift°) and TURP. At 24 
months of follow-up, the mean difference in IPSS reduction was 6.1 points, favoring 
TURP. Maximum flow rate was significantly higher after TURP at all follow-up 
intervals. Measures of erectile function were similar between groups at all time 
points, while ejaculatory function, based on the Male Sexual Health Questionnaire 
for Ejaculatory Dysfunction, favored PUL. Over the two-year follow-up, six patients 
in the PUL arm (13.6%) and two in the TURP arm (5.7%) underwent secondary 
treatment for return of LUTS. 

Gratzke C, Barber N, Speakman MJ, et al: Prostatic urethral lift vs transurethral 

resection of the prostate: Two-year results of the BPH6 prospective multicenter, 

randomized study. BJU INT 2017;119:767-775. PubMed PMID: 27862831 

Helo S, Welliver RC Jr, McVary KT: Minimally invasive and endoscopic management of 
benign prostatic hyperplasia, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, 

Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, 

vol 3, chap 146, pp 3420-3421. 

Lerner LB, McVary KT, Barry ML, et al: Management of lower urinary tract symptoms 

attributed to benign prostatic hyperplasia: AUA Guideline Part II—Surgical 

evaluation and treatment. J UROL 2021;206:818.https://www.auanet.org/

guidelines/guidelines/benign-prostatic-hyperplasia-(bph)-guideline 

Question #85 ANSWER=B 

If it is difficult for the ileal neobladder to reach the urethral stump for anastomosis, 

the following sequential maneuvers may be attempted. First, Trendelenburg 
position may be reduced, which may increase the neobladder descent slightly. 
However, complete elimination of Trendelenburg position precludes camera 
visualization over bowel loops to perform the anastomosis and therefore change to 
supine position will not be helpful. With gentle traction to stretch the neobladder 
downward into the pelvis, releasing and incising the peritoneum over the mesentery 

will facilitate neobladder descent. Another maneuver to decrease tension includes 
stapling the medial/proximal portion of the mesentery with caution to avoid 
ischemia to the neobladder. Finally, releasing the ileum around the ileocecal region 
attenuates tension for the neobladder-urethra anastomosis. Performing perineal 

Oc 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 43 


pressure to push the urethral stump cranially will not be enough to perform a 
tension-free anastomosis in this situation. Conversion to an ileal conduit or a sigmoid 
neobladder is an alternative but is not warranted without attempting the above 
maneuvers first. 

Guru KA: Minimally invasive urinary diversion, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, 

Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. 

Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, chap 142, pp 3268-3269. 

Question #86 ANSWER=C 

A large calculus in a Jehovah's Witness patient (or any patient refusing blood 

products) requires extensive discussions of treatment options and potential 

outcomes. Although observation is an option, the patient is symptomatic and a delay 
in intervention can lead to obstruction and progression of symptoms and stone size. 

SWL, although appearing benign, can result in steinstrasse, persistent 
hydronephrosis, pyonephrosis, and may ultimately require multiple interventions 
with poor overall stone-free rates, especially with a 3 cm stone. PCNL can be 

performed safely, however, has a higher risk of blood transfusion than ureteroscopic 

intervention. Staged ureteroscopic intervention in this complex, large, non


infectious stone is the approach with the highest chance of success and with the 

lowest risk for blood loss requiring transfusion, which is important for this patient. 
Laparoscopic surgery for this scenario is more invasive and can be considered as an 

option if endoscopic approaches fail. If there is a history of recurrent UTIs, further 

discussion with the patient regarding more invasive options (i.e., PCNL) to optimize 

stone clearance could be considered but must be balanced with increased risk of 

bleeding. 

Assimos D, Krambeck A, Miller NL et al: Surgical management of stones: 

AUA/Endourological Society Guideline, part II. J UROL 20J6;196:1161. 
https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/kidney-stones-surgical-management-guideline 

Aboumarzouk OM: Flexible ureteroscopy and laser lithotripsy for stones > 2 cm: A 
systematic review and meta-analysis. J ENDOUROL 2012;26:J 257-1263. 

Cohen J: Ureteropyeloscopic treatment of large, complex intrarenal, and proximal 

ureteral calculi. BJU INT 2013;111(3 Pt B):E127-31. 

Question #87 ANSWER=D 

Contrast-induced nephropathy typically causes a rise in the baseline serum 

creatinine. The etiology is most likely acute tubular necrosis secondary to 

vasoconstriction and the cytotoxic effects from contrast agents. The symptoms arise 

24-48 hours after contrast administration. Typically, patients are not oliguric. 

Nephrogenic systemic fibrosis is a rare complication of gadolinium administration 

during an MRI scan. Hematuria, like oliguria, can be a sign of acute interstitial 

O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


nephritis, but would not be directly related to contrast-induced nephropathy that 
first causes a rise in serum creatinine. 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Conventional radiology. Updated March 1, 
2021. https://university.auanet.org/core/uroradiology/conventional-radiology 

Question #88 ANSWER=E 

This patient underwent a thiazide challenge. When a thiazide diuretic is started on 

a patient with hypercalciuria and normocalcemia, renal leak hypercalciuria can be 

distinguished from primary hyperparathyroidism. Hyperparathyroidism can be 

unmasked if the patient develops hypercalcemia that persists after the thiazide is 

discontinued and/or if the PTH level increases on the thiazide. In this patient, the 

hypercalcemia persists after the thiazide is stopped and her PTH level increased while 
on the thiazide; therefore, primary hyperparathyroidism has been identified which 

would be best treated by parathyroid surgery, not observation. The diagnosis of 

primary hyperparathyroidism has already been made, therefore neither repeating a 

PTH level, nor resuming a thiazide diuretic, nor changing to potassium citrate is 

indicated. 

Miller NL, Borofsky MS: Evaluation and medical management of urinary lithiasis, in 

Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL 

WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 2, chap 92, pp 2050, 

2052. 

Eisner BE: Differentiating primary from secondary hyperparathyroidism in stone 

patients: The “thiazide challenge". J ENDOUROL 2009,23:191-192. 

Question #89 ANSWER=E 

This patient has bacterial vaginosis (BV) based on her exam, vaginal pH > 5, and 

microscopic evaluation that demonstrated clue cells, which are vaginal epithelial 

cells covered in bacteria. The treatment for BV is metronidazole 500 mg twice per 

day for seven days, metronidazole gel intravaginally once per day for five days, or 
clindamycin cream intravaginally at bedtime for seven days. Fluconazole and 

miconazole are both appropriate treatments for vaginal candidiasis. Single dose 

azithromycin 1 gram is used in the treatment of nongonococcal urethritis. Single 

dose metronidazole 2 gram or tinidazole 2 gram orally are the treatments for 

trichomoniasis. This patient has BV; therefore, observation would be a suboptimal 

treatment option. 

Borawski KM: Sexually transmitted diseases, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, 
Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. 

Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 2, chap 58, pp 1271-1272. 

O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


AUAUNIVERSITYCORE CURRICULUM:Sexually transmitted infection. Updated 
March 1, 2021. https:/university.auanet.org/core/urologic-infections/sexuallytransmitted-
infection 

Question #90 ANSWER=E 

Per the AUA Guidelines, laparoscopic surgery should not be offered as first-line 
therapy except in cases of anatomic abnormalities with large or complex stones. This 

patient has an ectopic, malrotated, pelvic kidney with an anterior facing renal pelvis 

and stones in the renal pelvis and upper pole region. The bony pelvis prevents a 

posterior approach to the kidney. Therefore, laparoscopic (or robotic) 

pyelolithotomy offers the safest, minimally invasive approach with a high success 

rate and stone-free rate. Since the patient is symptomatic from his stones, 

observation is not the best option. Based on the anatomy of his kidney and overlying 

bowel anteriorly and bony pelvis posteriorly, PCNL would not be safe. Additionally, 

the stone-free rates of ureteroscopy and SWL would be suboptimal compared to 

laparoscopic pyelolithotomy. SWL (often in the prone position) or ureteroscopy 
could be considered in select patients with ectopic kidneys and smaller stone 

burdens. 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Surgical treatment. Updated March 30, 2021. 
https://university.auanet.org/core/urolithiasis/surgical-stone-disease/index.cfm 

Question #91 ANSWER=D 

This patient has classic findings for a renal abscess. After starting I.V. antibiotics, the 

size of the abscess typically dictates management. Abscesses less than 3 cm in size 

can be managed by antibiotics alone. However, abscesses of all sizes in 

immunocompromised patients (such as our patient who has had a lung transplant) 

or those that do not respond to antimicrobial therapy warrant percutaneous 

drainage. Percutaneous drainage is the first-line procedure of choice for most renal 

abscesses greater than 5 cm in diameter. Large abscesses may require multiple drains, 
drain manipulations, and eventual surgical washout with possible need for 

nephrectomy. Observation with I.V. antibiotics alone is suboptimal in this 

immunocompromised patient. The addition of an antifungal agent would be useful 

if there was high suspicion for a fungal ball, which may happen in an 

immunocompromised patient, but is not described in this patient. A needle biopsy 

or aspiration may be necessary to differentiate an abscess from a hypervascular 
tumor, but this patient is showing signs of infection and renal abscess (lesion with 
decreased attenuation). Partial nephrectomy is not the next step in this patient but 
would be a consideration after more conservative measures had failed. 

Cooper KL, Badalato GM, Rutman MP: Infections of the urinary tract, in Partin AW, 

Dmochowski RR, Kavoussi LR, Peters CA (eds): CAMPBELL-WALSH-WEIN UROLOGY, 

ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol II, chap 55, pp 1172-1173. 

2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


Question #92 ANSWER=B 

Intractable pain following SWL may be an indication of perinephric hematoma 
formation or obstructing ureteral stone fragments. All patients with a decrease in 
hemoglobin or significant flank pain 24 hours following SWL should be examined 
with imaging (renal ultrasound or CT scan) to differentiate a perinephric hematoma 
versus obstruction of the collecting system. If a hematoma is suspected or identified, 

CT or MRI scan can be performed to evaluate the size of the hematoma and the 

degree of parenchymal injury. The majority of patients can be managed 

conservatively with careful observation of their hemodynamic status. Intravenous 

fluids or blood transfusions should be used to treat hypotension or severe anemia. 

Renal angiography should be used if there is significant bleeding that cannot be 

managed conservatively. If imaging demonstrates obstructing ureteral stone 

fragments, tamsulosin, ureteral stent placement, and/or ureteroscopic intervention 

may be considered. 

York NE, Lingeman JE: Complications of extracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy, in 
Taneja SS, Shah 0 (eds): TANEJA'S COMPLICATIONS OF UROLOGIC SURGERY, ed 5. 

Elsevier, 2018, chap 29, pp 299-300. 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Surgical treatment. Updated March 30, 2021. 

https://university.auanet.org/core/uroIithiasis/surgical-stone-disease/index.cfm 

Question #93 ANSWER=C 

The incidence of pancreatic injury is 2.1% during left radical nephrectomy. However, 
the majority of pancreatic injuries are diagnosed postoperatively and should always 

be in the differential for postoperative pain when operating on large left-sided renal 

masses. Given the clinical presentation shortly after surgery of severe, unremitting 

pain to the back, suspicion for a pancreatic injury should be high. The diagnosis of 

pancreatic injury is supported by the presence of an elevated serum amylase and 

lipase and confirmed by a CT scan of the abdomen. A serum creatinine kinase is 
elevated with rhabdomyolysis, which typically presents with muscle tenderness on 

the opposite side of the mass and dark urine. Duplex ultrasonography will not 

diagnose pancreatic injury. MRI scan of the spine is not necessary in this patient as 
musculoskeletal causes of pain would have likely improved with ketorolac and/or 

opioids. 

Patel RM, Kaler KS, Landman J: Fundamentals of laparoscopic and robotic urologic 
surgery, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): 

CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 1, chap

14, p 230.e1. 

Kumar A, Oanda A, Gamanagatti S: Blunt pancreatic trauma: A persistent diagnostic 

conundrum? WORLD JRADIOLOGY 2016;8:159-173. 

O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


Question #94 ANSWER=B 

Calcium supplements may contribute to calcium stone formation. In advising female 

patients on their risk for stone formation while taking calcium supplements, it is 

important to know both their menopausal status as well as whether or not they are 

hypercalciuric. Most post-menopausal women have reduced intestinal calcium 

absorption. Therefore, many of these individuals may not become hypercalciuric on 

calcium supplementation. One should analyze a 24-hour urine collection for calcium, 

and if the patient is normocalciuric, no limitation in calcium supplements is 

indicated. If the patient is hypercalciuric, one may initiate thiazide therapy to lower 

her urinary calcium excretion while allowing her to continue calcium 

supplementation. Bone densitometry will measure her degree of osteopenia or 

osteoporosis which will better assess if treatment is needed. To assess her calcium 

supplement intake, it is more useful to assess a 24-hour urine than serum calcium 

and parathyroid hormone levels. 

Pearle MS, Goldfarb DS, Assimos DG, et al: Medical management of kidney stones: 

AUA Guideline. J UROL 2014;192:316. https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/guidelines/

kidney-stones-medical-mangement-guideline 

Miller NL, Borofsky MS: Evaluation and medical management of urinary lithiasis, in 

Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL 

WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 2, chap 92, pp 2050


2051. 

Question #95 ANSWER=D 

In infants, the bladder is an intra-abdominal organ. During hernia repair, the lateral 

bladder wall lies close to the inguinal ring and may protrude through the ring as a 

"bladder ear". This location may result in injury or even resection of the bladder 

during herniorrhaphy, resulting in urinary extravasation. This results in infection, 

azotemia, and urinary ascites with intraperitoneal extravasation. This patient is 

azotemic with findings consistent with urinary extravasation. A cystogram will 

confirm the diagnosis. A Gastrografin^ enema, renal scan, or CT scan are not 

indicated based on clinical suspicion and history of hernia surgery. A paracentesis 

may confirm the diagnosis of urinoma, but again, the history of recent hernia surgery 

and a cystogram would directly confirm the proximate cause of the urinary ascites. 

Chang SJ, Chen JY, Hsu CK, et al: The incidence of inguinal hernia and associated risk 

factors of incarceration in pediatric inguinal hernia: A nation-wide longitudinal 

population-based study. HERNIA 2016;20(4):559—563. 

Question #96 ANSWER=D 

The treatment of non-metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (nmCRPC) 

48 0 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


changed significantly following the PROSPER, SPARTAN and ARAMIS trials, all 
showing the addition of a next generation androgen receptor antagonist improved 

metastasis-free survival (MFS) in patients with nmCRPC and a PSA doubling time < 

10 months (although the PSADT is not included in the package insert indications). 

Specifically, the PROSPER trial randomized 1401 men with nmCRPC to placebo or 

enzalutamide 160 mg daily. Median MFS was 36.6 months in those receiving 
enzalutamide vs. 14.7 months in those receiving placebo. Meanwhile, the SPARTAN 

trial randomized 1207 men with nmCRPC to placebo or apalutamide 240 mg daily. 

Median MFS was 40.4 months in those receiving apalutamide vs. 16.2 months in 

those receiving placebo. Further, the ARAMIS trial randomized 1509 men with 

nmCRPC to placebo or darolutamide 600 mg BID. Median MFS was 40.4 months in 

those receiving darolutamide vs. 18.4 months in those receiving placebo. Notably, 

darolutamide is structurally distinct from other non-steroidal antiandrogens, 

resulting in less penetration of the blood-brain barrier. Seizures were noted to be a 

potential risk in the dose escalation studies of enzalutamide, and patients with a 
history of seizures were excluded from the PROSPER (enzalutamide) and SPARTAN 

(apalutamide) trials. Preclinical studies of darolutamide did not demonstrate a pro


convulsive potential, thus such patients were included in the ARAMIS trial. No 
patient with a history of seizures in the darolutamide group had a seizure during 

the trial. In addition, the overall incidence of seizures in the trial was low (0.2%), 
with no difference in the incidence of seizures with darolutamide compared to the 

placebo group. Thus, darolutamide is the best choice for this patient with a history 

of seizures. There are no data supporting a benefit to switching from an LH-RH 

agonist (leuprolide) to a GnRH receptor antagonist (degarelix). Bicalutamide is a 

first-generation anti-androgen and has not been shown to provide a survival 

advantage in randomized trials in this clinical setting. 

Smith MR, Saad F, Chovvdhury S, et al: SPARTAN Investigators. Apalutamide 

treatment and metastasis-free survival in prostate cancer. NEJM 2018;378:1408-1418. 

Hussain M, Fizazi K, Saad F, et al: Enzalutamide in men with nonmetastatic, 
castration-resistant prostate cancer. NEJM 2018;378:2465-2474. 

Fizazi K, Shore N, Tammela TL, et al: Darolutamide in nonmetastatic, castration


resistant prostate cancer. NEJM 2019;380(13):1235-1246. 

Eggener S, VanderGried D, Szmulewitz R: Hormonal therapy for prostate cancer, in 
Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL 

WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, chap 161, p 3674. 

Question#97 ANSWER=A 

Adrenal crisis, or acute adrenal insufficiency, is life threatening. Signs and symptoms 

include abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, fever, hypotension, tachycardia, and 

impaired consciousness. Misdiagnosis or delayed diagnosis of an acute abdomen is 

common. In adrenal crisis, lab values demonstrate hyponatremia and hyperkalemia. 

Hypoglycemia is more common in children than adults. Because of the history of 

0 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


contralateral partial nephrectomy, this patient is more at risk for adrenal crisis 

because of possible vascular compromise of the contralateral adrenal gland. 

Treatment of adrenal crisis is I.V. normal saline and hydrocortisone. Treatment with 

diuretics would be inappropriate with hypovolemic hyponatremia. Patients with 
severe hyperkalemia and/or EKG changes receive calcium gluconate to stabilize the 

myocardium. This patient has only sinus tachycardia and the potassium is not 
markedly elevated. Abdominal CT scan would not elucidate the cause of his 
electrolyte abnormalities but would be a reasonable option after administration of 

I.V. hydrocortisone. He does not have clear indications for surgical re-exploration. 
Kutikov A, Crispen PL, Uzzo RG: Pathophysiology, evaluation, and medical 
management of adrenal disorders, Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski 

RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 

2020, vol 3, chap 106, p 2382. 

Torpy DJ, Falhammar H: Adrenal crisis. NEJM 2019;381:852-861. 

Question #98 ANSWER=A 

Informed consent can be characterized by preconditions, information, and 
consent. There are three components to informed consent: 1) preconditions 
(composed of competence and voluntariness); 2) information (composed of 

disclosure of information, recommendation of the care plan, and understanding by

the patient); 3) consent (composed of decision and authorization to proceed). Risk 

assessment is not one of the factors in informed consent, although it is important in 

making treatment decisions. Understanding the care plan is part of information, as 

is full disclosure. Competence is part of preconditions. 

Stoffel JT, Montgomery JS, Suskind AM, et al: Optimizing outcomes in urological 
surgery: Pre-operative care for the patient undergoing urologic surgery or 

procedure. AUA WHITE PAPER. Published 2018. https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/

guidelines/optimizing-outcomes-in-urological-surgery-pre-operative-care-for-thepatient-
undergoing-urologic-surgery-or-procedure 

Leclercq WK, Keulers BJ, Scheltinga MR, et al: A review of surgical informed consent: 

past, present, and future. A quest to help patients make better decisions. WORLD J 
SUR 2010;34:1406. 

Question #99 ANSWER=A 

Pelvic floor muscle therapy (PFMT) is pelvic floor rehabilitation which is generally 
directed by a pelvic floor physical therapist. PFMT is helpful even in patients who 

have tried pelvic floor muscle exercises (Kegel exercises) on their own and is usually 

recommended prior to considering surgery. Post-prostatectomy incontinence can 

continue to improve 6-12 months after surgery; therefore, it is recommended to wait 

at least that long before consideration of any anti-incontinence procedures such as 

50 O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


the male sling or artificial urinary sphincter. CIC is not indicated as his PVR is not 

elevated. Beta-agonist therapy is indicated for OAB; however, this patient has SUI; 
thus, it would not likely be an effective therapy. If he had severe SUI that did not 
improve despite PFMT, he could be considered for surgical therapy as early as six 

months after prostatectomy. 

Wessells H, Vanni AJ: Surgical procedures for sphincteric incontinence in the male, in 

Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL 

WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, chap 
131, pp 2993-2999. 

Sandhu JS, Breyer B, Comiter C, et al: Incontinence after prostate treatment: 

AUA/SUFU Guideline. JUROL 2019;202:369.https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/

guidelines/incontinence-after-prostate-treatment 

Question #100 ANSWER=B 

Primary hyperaldosteronism is an under recognized cause of hypertension. Although 
hypokalemia is classically described, greater than 60% of patients with a functional 
adenoma are normokalemic. The initial evaluation of primary hyperaldosteronism 

includes measurement of plasma renin activity (PRA) and plasma aldosterone to 

determine the aldosterone to renin ratio. Prior to screening, hypokalemia should be 
corrected, and potentially interfering medications stopped at least six weeks prior 

to testing. However, long-acting calcium channel blockers such as amlodipine have 

minimal effect on screening tests and do not need to be discontinued. In patients 
such as this, where the PRA is suppressed and the aldosterone to renin ratio is 

increased (> 30), primary hyperaldosteronism is suspected. A confirmatory test, such 

as a salt loading test, is then recommended. Once the diagnosis of primary 

hyperaldosteronism is confirmed, even in the presence of a unilateral adenoma, 

bilateral adrenal vein sampling should be performed because an adenoma can be 

non-functional in up to 20% of cases and the actual cause is bilateral adrenal 

hyperplasia. In this case, the next step would be to confirm the diagnosis with a 24


hour urinary aldosterone after three days on a high salt diet before proceeding with 

localizing tests or adrenalectomy. If the cause of the patient's primary 

hyperaldosteronism after completion of the evaluation is not from the adenoma but 

rather due to bilateral hyperplasia, treatment with an aldosterone receptor 

antagonist, such as spironolactone or eplerenone, would be appropriate. 

Kutikov A, Crispen PL, Uzzo RG: Pathophysiology, evaluation, and medical 
management of adrenal disorders, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, 

Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. 
Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, chap 106, pp 2367-2372. 

Question #101 ANSWER=C 

The CT scan demonstrates a large stone in the lower pole of the left kidney, however, 

O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


access to the lower pole is not straightforward secondary to a retrorenal colon. In 

this setting, staged ureteroscopy is the safest approach with the highest efficacy, 

since PCNL has a high risk of injury to adjacent structures. Although the stone 

parameter of skin-to-stone distance is favorable for SWL, the primary factors of stone 
location and size are not favorable for SWL, with or without a ureteral stent, when 
ureteroscopy is an option. Additionally, a stone density of 1100 Hounsfield units is 

unfavorable for SWL. Robotic pyelolithotomy is an option; however, it is much more 

invasive than ureteroscopy and would not be considered first-line treatment unless 

there was a simultaneous need for reconstruction or in cases of larger, more complex 

stones with aberrant anatomy. 

Assimos D, Krambeck A, Miller NL et al: Surgical management of stones: 

AUA/Endourological Society Guideline, Part II. J UROL 2016;196:1161. 
https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/kidney-stones-surgical-management-guideline 

Question #102 ANSWER=C 

Antimicrobial prophylaxis is recommended for all patients (even with no risk factors) 

who are undergoing cystoscopy with manipulation (i.e., biopsy, dilation of stricture, 

fulguration). According to the AUA Best Practice Statement on Urologic Surgery 

Antimicrobial Prophylaxis, the prophylactic antibiotics of choice are a 

fluoroquinolone or trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. Alternatives include 
aminoglycoside plus ampicillin, 1st/2nd generation cephalosporin, or 

amoxicillin/clavulanate. No antibiotics is incorrect since all patients undergoing 

cystoscopy with manipulation should receive prophylaxis. Ciprofloxacin is no longer 

the first drug of choice due to the Black Box warning and given an appropriate 

alternative antibiotic of choice (trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole). Nitrofurantoin 

does not cover potential tissue or systemic infection. Ampicillin without clavulanate 

or aminoglycoside does not provide adequate coverage. 

Wolf JS Jr, Bennett CJ, Dmochowski RR, et al: Urologic surgery antimicrobial 
prophylaxis: AUA BEST PRACTICE STATEMENT. Published 2008; Reviewed and validity 

confirmed 2011; amended 2012. https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/archived


documents/antimicrobiaI-prophylaxis-best-practice-statement 

Question #103 ANSWER=D 

Bladder stone formation is a long-term complication of augmentation cystoplasty. 

Routine bladder irrigations avoid buildup of mucus, which can serve as a nidus for 

stone formation. Increasing frequency of CIC may keep the bladder less full but 

would not necessarily flush out the mucus. Bladder stones in this population are 
often infectious, but antibiotic prophylaxis would not be indicated in this patient 

without UTIs. Hypocitraturia is not uncommon in patients after augmentation 

cystoplasty, however, neither correction of underlying metabolic abnormalities nor 
mucolytics decrease bladder stone formation in patients who have undergone 

augmentation cystoplasty. 

52 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


Thomas JC, Clayton DB, Adams MC: Lower urinary tract reconstruction in children, in 

Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL 

WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 1, chap 37, p 699. 

Husmann DA. Lessons learned from the management of adults who have undergone 

augmentation for spina bifida and bladder exstrophy: incidence and management 
of the non-lethal complications of bladder augmentation. INT J UROL 2018;25:94101. 


Question #104 ANSWER=C 

In select cases, an infected prosthesis can be removed, the location of the device 

washed out using an antibiotic salvage procedure, and a new device immediately 

placed. The advantage of this approach is the avoidance of the near certain chances 

of corporal fibrosis with length and girth loss that will ensue following implant 

removal and reimplantation at a later date. However, this approach should be 

restricted to men without evidence of sepsis or severe local infection. More typically, 

the infected device is removed, the infection is addressed with antibiotics, and the 
tissues are allowed to heal (for six weeks to six months). This approach has the 
disadvantage of corporal fibrosis, as mentioned above. This patient has systemic 

signs of infection as well as frank pus in the scrotum; therefore, a salvage procedure 

should not be performed, and the entire implant must be removed. When infection 

is superimposed, this can increase the level of difficulty of dissection for complete 

and safe removal of the reservoir. A second incision over the reservoir tubing will 

allow direct access to the reservoir in the retropubic space, simplifying device 

removal. 

Burnett AL, Nehra A, Breau RH, et al: Erectile dysfunction: AUA Guideline. J UROL 

2018;200:633. https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/guidelines/erectile-dysfunction


(ed)-guideline 

Clavell-Hernàndez J, Aly SG, Wang R, Sadeghi-Nejad H: Penile prosthesis reservoir 

removal: Surgical description and patient outcomes. J SEX MED 2019;16:146-152. 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Erectile dysfunction: Surgical management. 
Updated January 21, 2021. https://university.auanet.org/core/sexual-medicine


andrology/erectile-dysfunction-surgical-management/index.cfm 

Question #105 ANSWER=D 

The testicular, deferential, and cremasteric arteries provide blood supply to the 

testicle and form distal anastomoses. If the testicular artery is ligated during a 

laparoscopic varicocelectomy, the testis can survive on blood supply from the 

deferential and cremasteric arteries. The cremasteric artery is a branch of the inferior 

epigastric artery which comes off the external iliac artery. The internal iliac artery 

divides into an anterior and posterior trunk. The posterior trunk of the internal iliac 

2022 American Urological Association. AII Rights Reserved. 53 


does not have any visceral branches. The superior vesical artery is a branch of the 

anterior trunk of the internal iliac and gives rise to the deferential artery. The 
internal pudendal is also a branch of the anterior trunk of the internal iliac, but it 

supplies the rectum, perineum, and external genitalia. There is an ilioinguinal nerve 

but not an ilioinguinal artery. 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Testis, epididymis, vas deferens. Updated 
March 1, 2021. https://university.auanet.org/core/anatomy-physiology/testis


epididymis-vas-deferens/index.cfm 

Question #106 ANSWER=A 

Although incomplete bladder emptying (PVR > 150 mL) occurs in up to 30% of 

women after 100 U intradetrusor onabotulinumtoxinA injection, it is not necessary 

to institute CIC unless someone is significantly bothered by voiding symptoms, 

having recurrent UTI, or is in complete retention. Although this scenario would not 

be considered "chronic urinary retention (CUR)," the AUA white paper on CUR 

supports this approach. Similarly, medical treatment with tamsulosin is not 

necessary, though could be considered if she had bothersome LUTS. There is no role 

for UDS as her incontinence is improved. Although she has increased WBCs on her 

urinalysis, she does not have symptoms of a UTI and, therefore urine culture and 

antibiotics are not indicated. Prophylactic antibiotics could be considered if she were 

having recurrent UTls refractory to non-antibiotic prevention regimens. 

Visco AG, Brubaker L, Richter HE, et al: Anticholinergic therapy vs. 
onabotulinumtoxinA for urgency urinary incontinence. NEJM 2012;367:1803-1813. 

Stoffel JT, Peterson AC, Sandhu JS, et al: AUA White Paper on nonneurogenic chronic 

urinary retention: Consensus definition, treatment algorithm, and outcome end 

points. J UROL 2017;198:153-160. 

Reynolds WS, Cohn JA: Overactive bladder, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, 

Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. 

Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, chap 117, p 2647. 

Question #107 ANSWER=C 

The CT scan shows a stone located within a fluid filled structure in the anterior upper 

to mid-pole region of the right kidney, likely a calyceal diverticulum. The patient is 

symptomatic and has recurrent UTIs. If asymptomatic, she could be observed. 

However, symptoms are present, therefore treatment is recommended. SWL is 

generally unsuccessful for the treatment of stones within calyceal diverticula. 

Ureteroscopy is less invasive and can be effective for small volume stones in an upper 

or mid-pole diverticulum such as this case. Balloon dilation and stent placement 

through the ostium to the calyceal diverticulum may improve drainage out of the 

diverticulum but will not address the stone material in the diverticulum. Stenting 

O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


though the ostium can also be performed after treating the stone in more capacious 
diverticula to try and improve drainage of the region in the future. PCNL is effective, 

however, this case is an example when ureteroscopy would be preferred based on 
the location of the diverticulum, the relatively small size of the diverticulum, and its 
anterior location. For a larger diverticulum, fulguration may also help obliterate the 

cavity to reduce the chance for recurrence. For an anterior calyceal diverticulum with 

thin overlying parenchyma, laparoscopy is the preferred option, but typically in cases 

where less invasive endoscopic approaches are not reasonable approaches, such as 

in large volume diverticula and/or larger stone burdens. Partial or heminephrectomy 
may be an option if the diverticulum was occupying a large portion of the kidney 

that has atrophied. The CT scan does not show a lesion that requires a biopsy and 

fulguration. 

Leavitt DA, de la Rosette JJMCH, Hoenig DM: Strategies for nonmedical 
management of upper urinary tract calculi, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, 

Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. 

Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 2, chap 93, pp 2077-2078. 

Assimos D, Krambeck A, Miller NL et al: Surgical management of stones: 
AUA/Endourological Society Guideline, Part II. J UROL 2016;196:1161. 

https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/kidney-stones-surgical-management-guideline 

Question #108 ANSWER=E 

In the setting of low-volume stage 2B seminoma, either XRT (30-36 Gy, dog-leg 

template) or chemotherapy (IGCCCG good-risk chemotherapy options: etoposide 

and cisplatin x 4 cycles or BEP x 3 cycles) are standards of care. Radiation therapy is 

contraindicated in the setting of Crohn's disease. Repeat imaging, when indicated 

for equivocal nodes < 2 cm, is recommended in four-eight weeks, but is not 

recommended if nodes are > 2 cm. Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-PET/CT scan has no role 
in the pre-chemotherapy setting. 

Stephenson AJ, Gilligan TD: Neoplasms of the testis, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi 
LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed J 2. 
Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 2, chap 76, pp 1704-1705. 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Testis neoplasms. Updated January 19, 2021. 

https://university.auanet.org/core/oncology-adult/testis-neoplasms/index.cfm 

Question #109 ANSWER=D 

The patient has clinically high-risk prostate cancer. For patients with high/very highrisk 
prostate cancer, NCCN Guideline recommendations include XRT with 1.5 to 3 
years of androgen deprivation therapy (ADT). Although XRT with brachytherapy and 

1.5 to 3 years of ADT would also represent an option, XRT with brachytherapy would 
not be advised in such a patient without one to three years of ADT. 
O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


The concept of hypofractionation for prostate cancer treatment is to deliver higher 
fraction sizes per treatment, which shortens treatment duration and thereby confers 

favorable implications for patient convenience, cost, and resource utilization. 

Specifically, conventional XRT fractionation involves a fraction size of 180 to 200 cGy, 
while moderate hypofractionation is defined as a fraction size between 240 cGy and 

340 cGy and ultra-hypofractionation is defined as a fraction size of 500 cGy. Multiple 
prospective randomized trials have compared moderate hypofractionation to 

conventional fractionation and have reported no statistically significant difference 

in cancer outcomes. These trials have included patients across the spectrum of 
disease risk, with high-risk patients comprising nearly 20% of the studied 

populations to date, and no evidence of a significant interaction exists between 

treatment effect and risk group. Accordingly, per current ASTRO/ASCO/AUA 
Guidelines, moderate hypofractionation should be offered to men with high-risk 

prostate cancer receiving external beam radiotherapy to the prostate as long as the 

intended treatment does not include the pelvic lymph nodes, as the clinical target 
volume in the majority of studies evaluating moderate hypofractionation did not 
include the pelvic lymph nodes. In contrast, these current Guidelines do not 

recommend ultra-hypofractionation for men with high-risk prostate cancer due to 
insufficient comparative evidence. 

Morgan SC, Hoffman K, Loblaw DA, et al: Hypofractionated radiation therapy for 
localized prostate cancer: An ASTRO, ASCO, and AUA Evidence-Based Guideline. J 
CLIN ONCOL 2018;36:3411-3430. 

Phillips R, Hazell S, Song DY: Radiation therapy for prostate cancer, in Partin AW, 
Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN 

UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, chap 157, p 3611. 

Schaeffer E, Srinivas S, Antonarakis E: NCCN GUIDELINES, version 1.2022. 

https://www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/prostate.pdf 

Question #110 ANSWER=A 

The CDC recommends HPV vaccination for boys and girls within the ages of 9-14 
years old. It is also recommended for everyone through age 26 years if they were not 

previously vaccinated when younger. It is not recommended for everyone older than 

26 years but can be considered on an individual basis. Up until age 15, the vaccine is 

given on a two-dose schedule. Older individuals and those with 
immunocompromising conditions will get a three-dose schedule. The vaccine is 

meant to prevent, not treat, HPV infection so should ideally be given prior to 

becoming sexually active. HPV vaccine can prevent future infections that can lead to 

cancers of the cervix, vulva, penis, anus, and back of the throat. 

AUAUNIVERSITYCORE CURRICULUM:Sexually transmitted infection. Updated 
March 1, 2021. https://university.auanet.org/core/uroIogic-infections/sexually


transmitted-infection/index.cfm 

Oc 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


CDC: Human Papillomavirus. For clinicians. https://www.cdc.gov/hpv/hcp/index.html 

Question #111 ANSWER=C 

Patients who receive opioids for acute pain are at increased risk for long-term use. 

The risk of long-term use is increased if initial opioid prescription is high dose, 

extended release/long acting, or for a lengthy duration. Extended-release 

formulations should not be prescribed. Acute pain is sometimes severe enough to 

warrant a brief course of opioid therapy. The CDC recommends that three days of 

medication is usually sufficient for acute pain. A reasonable patient for opioid 

therapy is someone with an acute, painful condition that has not responded to nonopioid 
treatment, no evidence of a current or previous drug problem, and an 

unremarkable prescription drug monitoring program (PDMP) search. Both 
oxycodone-acetaminophen and hydrocodone-acetaminophen are reasonable for 

three days (12 tablets). Tramadol is contraindicated in adolescents between 12-18 

years of age who are at increased risk for respiratory depression (obesity, obstructive 

sleep apnea, severe lung disease). 

Dowell D, Haegerich TM, Chou R: CDC guideline for prescribing opioids for chronic 
pain — United States, 2016. MMWR RECOMM REP 2016;65(No. RR-1):1—49. 

NEJM Knowledge+ Pain Management and Opioids module. 

https://knowIedgepIus.nejm.org/pain-opioids 

Question #112 ANSWER=A 

Initial dose titration in the office and detailed counseling regarding possible adverse 

events should be undertaken prior to prescribing intraurethral alprostadil. The 

testing dose selected by the clinician should be one that would be expected to 

produce an erection satisfactory for intercourse; the 100 ug dose would likely be less 
effective and there is no evidence that it would be safer in this patient. There is no 

contraindication for intraurethral alprostadil usage in patients who are on nitrates. 

The patients are asked to void prior to applicator stem insertion as the former aids 

in applicator insertion as well as in dispersal and dissolution of the medicine along 

the urethra. Rolling the penis between the hands as well as walking or standing for 

ten minutes to aid in blood flow are steps that are taken after the patient has voided 

and the pellet has been inserted. 

Burnett AL, Nehra A, Breau RH, et al: Erectile dysfunction: AUA Guideline. J UROL 

2018;200:633. https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/guidelines/erectile-dysfunction


(ed)-guideline 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Erectile dysfunction: Medical treatment. 

Updated February 24, 2021. https://university.auanet.org/core/sexual-medicine


andrology/erectile-dysfunction-medical-treatment/index.cfm 

O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


Question #113 ANSWER=C 

The clinical presentation is consistent with idiopathic retroperitoneal fibrosis. The CT 

scan reveals a retroperitoneal mass encasing the aorta, IVC, and bilateral ureters. 

After initial ureteral stenting to relieve obstruction and consideration for biopsy to 

rule out malignancy, medical treatment should be considered first prior to 
ureterolysis. First-line medical treatments include steroids or tamoxifen (a

nonsteroidal antiestrogen). Mycophenolate mofetil, azathioprine, or 
cyclophosphamide can also be used as primary or salvage therapy, but those agents 

are used in combination with steroids. Their stand-alone efficacy is unknown. 

Ureterolysis can be undertaken if medical therapy fails. 

Nakada SY, Best SL: Management of upper urinary tract obstruction, in Partin AW, 

Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN 
UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 2, chap 89, p 1978. 

Question #114 ANSWER=B 

Recurrent or worsening urinary incontinence after artificial urinary sphincter (AUS) 

placement may result from either stress urinary incontinence (SUI), urgency urinary 
incontinence (UUI), or a combination of the two. If there is a strong UUI component 

that does not respond to first-line treatment, then UDS may be helpful. If history 

and physical exam are consistent with SUI, and there is no obvious findings on 

examination to suggest a cause or infection, then cystoscopy should be performed. 
If urethral erosion is detected, then explantation of the entire device is warranted. 

If no erosion is seen, then ultrasound or other cross-sectional imaging of the 

pressure-regulating balloon (PRB) should be performed. If the PRB is full 

(approximately 24 mL), then device revision is indicated, and options may include 

moving or downsizing the cuff, placing a tandem or transcorporal cuff, or increasing 

the PRB pressure. If the PRB is empty or under-filled on ultrasound, then a leak 

somewhere in the AUS tubing or components is suspected and the entire device 

(cuff, pump, and PRB) should be replaced. Because this AUS failed less than two years 
after it was placed, one option would be to determine which component of the 

device has failed (i.e., with an ohmmeter), then the specific component that leaked 

can be replaced and the AUS PRB refilled with the appropriate amount of fluid. 

Brucker BM, Demirtas A, Fong E, et al: Artificial urinary sphincter revision: The role 
of ultrasound. UROL 2013;82:1424—1429. 

Wessells H, Vanni AJ: Surgical procedures for sphincteric incontinence in the male, in 
Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL 

WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, 

chap 131, pp 3005-3007. 

Sandhu JS, Breyer B, Comiter C, et al: Incontinence after prostate treatment: 

AUA/SUFU Guideline. J UROL 2019;202:369. 

58 O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/guidelines/incontinence-after-prostate


treatment 

Question #115 ANSWER=A 

While adrenal masses that are < 10 Hounsfield units (HU) on unenhanced CT scan are 

consistent with adenomas, approximately 30% of adenomas have a low lipid content 

and will therefore demonstrate an attenuation > 10 HU. When such incidental, non


functional lesions are identified, further evaluation includes CT scan with washout 

protocol, obtaining 1-minute and 15-minute (delayed) post-contrast images. Lipid


poor adenomas will exhibit rapid washout of enhancement, such that an absolute 

percentage washout (enhanced-delayed/enhanced-unenhanced x 100) of > 60% is 
indicative of an adenoma. For non-functioning adenomas of this size (< 4 cm), 
surveillance (rather than adrenalectomy) with reimaging at 6, 12, and 24 months has 
historically been recommended to assess for lesion growth as a marker of potential 
malignancy. Notably, more recent guidelines from Europe have suggested that no 

further follow-up is necessary for patients with < 4 cm lesions that are metabolically 
inactive and exhibit benign images features. However, of the answer choices 

provided herein, a repeat CT scan in six months would be appropriate. MRI scan 
would not, in this case, add incremental information and would therefore not be 

indicated; moreover, gadolinium-enhanced washout studies do not provide the 
same level of diagnostic discrimination as CT washout for adrenal adenomas and are 

thereby not recommended in clinical practice. Meanwhile, gaIIium-68 dotatate PET 

has emerged as the preferred imaging modality in the work-up of 

pheochromocytoma/paraganglioma, as dotatate has a high affinity for the 

somatostatin surface receptor and thereby facilitates detection of 

multifocal/metastatic disease. Herein, however, with a negative metabolic 
evaluation and CT washout study consistent with an adrenal adenoma, PET would 

not be indicated. Biopsy may be useful when metastatic disease is suspected (after a 

negative metabolic evaluation), but cannot reliably distinguish adrenal adenomas 
from carcinomas, and would not be indicated with the radiographic characteristics 

as here consistent with an adenoma. 

Kutikov A, Crispen PL, Uzzo RG: Pathophysiology, evaluation, and medical 

management of adrenal disorders, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, 

Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. 
Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, chap 106, pp 2394-2399. 

Tan TH, Hussein Z, Saad FFA, et al: Diagnostic performance of 68Ga-DOTATATE 

PET/CT, 18F-FDG PET/CT, and 131I-MIBG scintigraphy in mapping metastatic 

pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma. NUCL MED MOL IMAGING 2015;49:143


151. 

Question #116 ANSWER=E 

Patients with distal RTA may demonstrate hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis if they 

O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


have the complete form of RTA. These patients can often be identified by their serum 

electrolyte abnormalities which include hypokalemia, hyperchloremia, and reduced 

serum bicarbonate. Hypokalemia (most commonly seen with complete distal RTA), 

not hyperkalemia, remains the most life-threatening of the metabolic abnormalities 
found in patients (particularly infants) with distal RTA. There are no significant 

changes to serum calcium noted with distal RTA that can be life-threatening. 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Pathology & evaluation. Updated December 

22, 2020. https://university.auanet.org/core/urolithiasis/medical-stone-disease


pathology-evaluation/index.cfm 

Miller NL, Borofsky MS: Evaluation and medical management of urinary lithiasis, in 

Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL 

WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 2, chap 92, p 2055. 

Question #117 ANSWER=D 

The patient presents for treatment of a recurrent urethral stricture. Given that the 

stricture is greater than 2 cm, direct vision internal urethrotomy would not be the 
first line therapy. Similarly, while dilation and self-catheterization can be offered to 

patients who are not candidates for urethroplasty, there is no reason to believe this 
patient would not be a urethroplasty candidate given his age. When feasible, single 

stage repairs are preferred because they provide similar long-term outcomes with 

fewer operations than staged repairs. Buccal mucosa is the preferred graft material 

for urethroplasty. While fasciocutaneous flap could be appropriate here, dorsal 

onlay with buccal is preferred because the postoperative complication profile, 

patient satisfaction and long-term success rates are superior to fasiocutaneous flap 

urethroplasty. 

Wessells H, Angermeier KW, Elliott S et al: Male urethral stricture: AUA Guideline. J 

UROL 2017;197:182. 

https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/guidelines/urethral-stricture-guideline 

Question #118 ANSWER=C 

Though she has a positive cough stress test, it is difficult to make a definitive 

diagnosis based on symptoms and initial evaluation, especially since she does not 
have classic symptoms of stress incontinence. Therefore, additional urodynamic 

evaluation should be considered before proceeding with surgical intervention, such 

as a sling. According to the AUA/SUFU Female SUI Treatment Guidelines, cystoscopy 

should not be performed unless there is a concern for urinary tract abnormalities. A 

CT urogram would be appropriate if a genitourinary fistula was suspected, however 

she does not have any risk factors for a fistula. Vaginal estrogen can be beneficial in 

a postmenopausal woman with atrophy and genitourinary symptoms of menopause, 
including vaginal dryness, itching, urinary urgency, and frequency; however, it has 
not been shown beneficial in treating urinary incontinence. 

60 O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


Winters JC, Dmochowski RR, Goldman HB, et al: Adult urodynamics: AUA/SUFU 

Guideline. J UROL 2012;188:2464. 

https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/guidelines/urodynamics-guideline 

Lucioni A, Kobashi KC: Evaluation and management of women with urinary 

incontinence and pelvic prolapse, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski 

RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 
2020, vol 3, chap 112, p 2525. 

Kobashi KC, Albo ME, Dmochowski RR, et al: Surgical treatment of female stress 
urinary incontinence: AUA/SUFU Guideline. J UROL 2017;198:875. 
https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/guidelines/stress-urinary-incontinence-(sui)


guideline 

Question #119 ANSWER=A 

This UDS documents neurogenic detrusor overactivity and detrusor external 

sphincter dyssynergia (DESD) in a patient with MS. Male MS patients with DESD 

appear to be at greatest risk for urological complications including upper tract 
deterioration and the upper tracts must be assessed early in this patient. At this time, 

videourodynamics would be redundant and unnecessary, while cystoscopy is unlikely 

to influence treatment planning and would not be the most appropriate first step. 

MRI scan of the spine may be indicated in the scenario of unknown pre-existing 

neurogenic disease but is unnecessary with a diagnosis of MS. His obstruction 

appears to be secondary to DESD, so there is no reason to size his prostate with a 

TRUS for a subsequent outlet procedure. 

Kowalik CCG, Wein AJ, Dmochowski RR: Neuromuscular dysfunction of the lower 
urinary tract, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): 
CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, 
chap 116, pp 2607-2608. 

Question #120 ANSWER=A 

The T2 and DWI MRI images show no focal lesions within the prostate. As the patient 
has a low PSA density (0.06 ng/mL), a recent negative 12-core biopsy, and an MRI 

without a focal lesion, he is at low risk of having a clinically significant prostate 

cancer. In particular, without a suspicious area on MRI scan, neither targeted biopsies 

nor an additional 12-core biopsy would be appropriate. The patient should have a 

repeat PSA in three to six months. The Decipher genomic test is a tissue-based 

prognostic biomarker used following the diagnosis of prostate cancer. 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Updated 

March 25, 2021. https://university.auanet.org/core/uroradioIogy/magnetic


resonance-imaging-(mri)/index.cfm 

2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 61 


Ahmed HU, El-Shater Bosaily A, et al: Diagnostic accuracy of multi-parametric MRI 

and TRUS biopsy in prostate cancer (PROMIS): A paired validating confirmatory 

study. LANCET 2017;389(10071):815-822. 

Question #121 ANSWER=A 

Asymptomatic bacteriuria is common in the elderly and does not require antibiotics 

treatment in the absence of UTI symptoms. The PVR of 150 mL does not justify the 

use of UDS or CIC. Upper tract imaging and cystoscopy are not indicated in a patient 

without a significant past medical history and is not indicated in the evaluation of 

asymptomatic bacteriuria. The AUA UTI Guideline (2019) state that clinicians should 

not treat asymptomatic bacteriuria (Statement 8). The correct answer is observation. 

Anger J, Lee A, Ackerman AL, et al: Recurrent uncomplicated urinary tract infections 

in women: AUA/CUA/SUFU Guideline. J UROL 2019;202:282. 

https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/guidelines/recurrent-uti 

Question #122 ANSWER=B 

The cavernosal nerves, branches of the parasympathetic plexus, travel within the 

lateral prostatic fascia, also known as the parietal pelvic fascia, and are located 

posterolateral to the prostate. Nerve bundles are noted traveling along the prostate 

laterally and anteriorly as well. The endopelvic fascia blends with the prostatic 

capsule and also connects with the levator ani fascia, but neither carries the 

cavernosal nerves. Denonvilliers' fascia lies between the posterior wall of the 

prostate and rectum, and nerves do not course through this plane. The obturator 

fascia is the fascia of the internal obturator muscle and is not associated with the 

cavernosal nerves. 

Kavoussi PK: Surgical, radiographic, and endoscopic anatomy of the male 

reproductive system, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ 

(eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 2, 

chap 63, p 1379. 

Question #123 ANSWER=B 

This patient has metastatic hormone-sensitive prostate cancer (mHSPC). Guidelines 

recommend he be offered genetic counseling and germline testing regardless of age 

and family history, as approximately 12% of patients with metastatic prostate cancer 

have inherited DNA repair mutations. Indeed, the finding of alterations in 

homologous recombination DNA repair (i.e., BRCA, ATM), microsatellite instability, 

or deficient mismatch repair (MMR) may be utilized to guide future therapy. For 

example, PARP inhibitors have been demonstrated to improve survival in patients 

with metastatic castration-resistant prostate cancer (mCRPC) who have mutations in 

DNA repair enzymes. Similarly, it has been suggested that platinum-based 

62 O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


chemotherapy may improve outcomes in these patients. Local treatment to the 

prostate with XRT (in addition to androgen deprivation therapy) may be considered 
for select mHSPC patients with low-volume metastatic disease, based on a subgroup 

analysis from the STAMPEDE trial demonstrating a survival benefit. However, the 

patient here would be classified as having high-volume metastatic disease, which is 

defined as greater than or equal to four bone metastases with at least one metastasis 

outside of the spine/pelvis and/or the presence of visceral metastases, and thus, local 

therapy to the prostate is not recommended (unless it is a clinical trial), particularly 

in an asymptomatic patient. The role of novel PET scans (i.e., fluciclovine or PSMA


based) for patients with advanced prostate cancer continues to evolve. Fluciclovine's 

FDA approval was for patients with suspected recurrence after treatment, and such 

studies may be of utility for patients with a rising PSA after therapy and negative 

conventional imaging. For patients with metastases documented on conventional 
imaging, the value of such advanced imaging remains undetermined. The decision 

to obtain novel PET scans in this setting should incorporate consideration of the 
likelihood that incremental information derived from the scan would meaningfully 

influence subsequent management. For this patient with high volume metastatic 

disease determined on conventional imaging, the options for treatment are unlikely 

to be impacted by an 18F-fIuciclovine PET scan, and thus the study would not be 
necessary to obtain. Radium-223 is indicated for patients with mCRPC and symptoms 

from bone metastases in the absence of visceral disease or lymphadenopathy > 3 cm, 
and thus should not be used here in the patient with hormone-sensitive, 

asymptomatic disease. Likewise, cabazitaxel represents an option for mCRPC patients 

who have received prior docetaxel chemotherapy but would not be indicated herein. 

Trabulsi EJ, Rumble RB, Jadvar H, et al: Optimum imaging strategies for advanced 
prostate cancer: ASCO Guideline. J CLIN ONCOL 2020;38:1963-1996. 

Parker CC, James ND, Brawley CD, et al: Radiotherapy of the primary tumor for newly 
diagnosed metastatic prostate cancer (STAMPEDE): A randomized controlled phase 

3 trial. LANCET 2018;392:2353. 

AUA UNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Prostate cancer: Advanced disease. Updated 
January 21, 2021. https://university.auanet.org/core/oncology-adult/prostate-cancer


advanced-disease/index.cfm 

NCCN GUIDELINES, Prostate cancer, 2021, version 1.2022. 
https://www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/prostate.pdf 

Question #124 ANSWER=A 

This patient meets the definition for uncomplicated bladder pain syndrome as 
described in the AUA/SUFU Interstitial Cystitis/Bladder Pain Syndrome Guidelines. 

First line treatment includes education, behavioral modification, and stress 

management practices. Second line treatment includes manual pelvic floor physical 

therapy techniques as appropriate and oral medications including: amitriptyline, 
cimetidine, hydroxyzine, pentosan polysulfate (PPS), and intravesical instillation. 

O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


Multimodal therapy is often required. Cystoscopy with hydrodistention and 

onabotulinumtoxinA are third-and fourth-line therapies, respectively, and would 

not be provided before the aforementioned oral therapies. Cystoscopy would not be 
indicated in the initial evaluation of patients with symptoms of bladder pain 

syndrome and a normal urinalysis. PPS is the only FDA approved oral agent for 

interstitial cystitis. Its use has recently been linked to a vision-threatening macular 
condition known as pigmentary maculopathy. This is characterized by difficulty 

reading and adjusting to dim lighting. Studies have shown that chronic use of PPS is 

associated with pigment retinopathy which oftentimes is misdiagnosed as agerelated 
macular degeneration. Use of PPS should be used with caution and would 

be contraindicated in this patient who already has macular degeneration. Patients 

should be counseled about the potential association with this condition, and it 

should be prescribed at the lowest dose and for the shortest duration possible. 

Hanno PM, Erickson D, Moldwin R, et al: Diagnosis and treatment of interstitial 

cystitis/bladder pain syndrome: AUA Guideline amendment. J UROL 2015;193:1545. 
https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/guidelines/interstitial-cystitis-(ic/bps)-guideline 

Foote, JE, Hanif A, Jain N: Chronic exposure to pentosan polysulfate sodium is 

associated with retinal pigmentary changes and vision loss. J UROL 2019;201(4):e688. 

Pearce WA, Chen R, Jain N: Pigmentary maculopathy associated with chronic 

exposure to pentosan polysulfate sodium. OPTHALMOLOGY 2018;125(11):1793


1802. 

Question #125 ANSWER=D 

According to AUA Guidelines, localized prostate cancer patients electing 
management with active surveillance should be encouraged to have a confirmatory 

biopsy within two years of initial diagnosis. Further, while guidelines indicate that 

MRI scan may be considered as a component of active surveillance, data does not 

support using MRI to replace confirmatory biopsy. Basing the decision for repeat 

biopsy in men on active surveillance solely on changes in MRI parameters can miss a 

significant proportion of higher-grade disease. A recent AUA Policy Statement 
asserted "the current information about mp [multi-parametric] MRI is not sufficient 
to support a role for repeat mpMRI in the absence of any confirmatory biopsy for 
monitoring men on active surveillance." Thus, in this patient diagnosed two years ago 

and managed with active surveillance, repeat prostate biopsy, rather than 

PSA/DRE/MRI in one year, should be undertaken. Moreover, the AUA Guidelines 

state, "Tissue based genomic biomarkers [such as Decipher^] have not shown a clear 
role in active surveillance for localized prostate cancer and are not necessary for 

follow-up." Indeed, genomic biomarker testing of the patient's biopsy tissue after 

two years on active surveillance would be unlikely helpful in guiding management. 
ConfirmMDx° is indicated for men without prostate cancer, a previously negative 

biopsy, and ongoing suspicion for a clinically meaningful prostate cancer. Decipher° 

genomic biomarker can be used in men with low-risk prostate cancer to determine 

suitability for active surveillance but would be indicated early after diagnostic 

O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


biopsy, not two years later. 

Chesnut GT, Vertosick E, Benfante N, et al: Role of changes in magnetic resonance 

imaging or clinical stage in evaluation of disease progression for men with prostate 
cancer on active surveillance. EUR UROL 2020;77:501-507. 

Bjurlin MA, Carroll PR, Eggener S, et al: Update of the standard operating procedure 
on the use of multiparametric magnetic resonance imaging for the diagnosis, 

staging, and management of prostate cancer. J UROL 2020;203:706-712. 

Eggener S, Rumble B, Armstrong, et al: Molecular biomarkers in localized prostate 
cancer: ASCO GUIDELINE. J CLIN ONCOL 2020;38:1474-1494. 

Trabulsi EJ, Rumble RB, Jadvar H, et al: Optimum imaging strategies for advanced 
prostate cancer: ASCO Guideline. J CLIN ONCOL 2020;38(17):1963-1996. 

https://pubmed.ncbi.mm.nih.gov/31940221/ 

Sanda MG, Cadeddu JA, Kirkby E, et al: Clinically localized prostate cancer: 

AUA/ASTRO/SUO Guideline. Part II: Recommended approaches and details of specific 

care options. J UROL 2018;199:990. https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/guidelines/

prostate-cancer-clinically-localized-guideline 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Prostate cancer localized and locally advanced 
treatment. Updated March 1, 2021. https://university.auanet.org/core/oncology


adult/prostate-cancer-localized-and-locally-advanced-treatment/index.cfm 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Prostate cancer screening, diagnosis and risk 
stratification. Updated January 21, 2021. https://university.auanet.org/core/oncology 

-adult/prostate-cancer-screening-diagnosis-and-risk-stratification/index.cfm 

Question #126 ANSWER=A 

Water vapor thermal therapy (Rezum^) utilizes convective radiofrequency power to 

generate thermal therapy in the form of water vapor injected transurethrally into the 

transition zone of the prostate. It has been shown to be effective and is indicated for 

men with prostate volumes between 30 mL and 80 mL. Furthermore, water vapor 

therapy can be done as an outpatient office procedure and does not result in 

ejaculatory dysfunction unlike surgical techniques such as TURP or laser procedures. 

The other technique that does not result in ejaculatory dysfunction is the prostate 

urethral lift (UroLifte), but unlike Rezum^, UroLift® is not indicated in patients with 
large median lobes. The optimal technique for water vapor therapy starts at the 3 

and 9 o'clock positions 1 cm distal to the bladder neck and uses normal saline for 

enhanced visualization and urethral surface cooling. The injection sites are 1 cm 
apart, allowing contiguously overlapping thermal lesions. The technology is targeted 

for patients wishing to preserve sexual function and may be modified for patients 

with.a median lobe. 

0 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


Helo S, Welliver RC Jr, McVary KT: Minimally invasive and endoscopic management 
of benign prostatic hyperplasia, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski 
RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 

2020, vol 3, chap 146, pp 3421-3422. 

Lerner LB, McVary KT, Barry ML, et al: Management of benign prostatic 
hyperplasia/lower urinary tract symptoms: AUA Guideline 2021. J UROL 

2021;206:818. https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/guidelines/benign-prostatic


hyperplasia-(bph)-guideline 

Question #127 ANSWER=E 

For men with a previously negative prostate biopsy, there are several available 

biomarkers to risk-stratify the likelihood of detecting high-grade cancer on repeat 

biopsy, including serum (4kScore°, prostate health index [PHI]), urinary (PCA3”, 

ExoDx^, and Select MDx°), and tissue (Confirm MDx^). In addition, MRI imaging may 

be used in this setting as well. Confirm MDx^ (epigenetic evaluation of 

hypermethylation in three genes) evaluates prostate tissue from the previous 

negative biopsy (within prior 30 months) to predict the likelihood of cancer on a 

subsequent biopsy. Select MDx^ evaluates mRNA in the urine after DRE, but since 

this man has a urinary diversion, his urine would not contain mRNA from his 

prostate. Decipher^ (mRNA expression of 22 genes), Prolaris” (mRNA expression of 

cell cycle progression genes), and Oncotype Dx^ are biopsy-based genomic tests 

available after the diagnosis of prostate cancer to predict the likelihood of adverse 

pathology, metastasis or cancer-specific mortality, but are not indicated prior to the 
diagnosis of prostate cancer. 

NCCN GUIDELINES, Prostate cancer early detection, NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines 

in Oncology, version 2.2020 
https://www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/prostate_detection.pdf 

Salami SS, Palapattu GS, Partin AW, Morgan TM: Prostate cancer biomarkers, in 
Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL 
WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, chap 149, p 3487. 

Question #128 ANSWER=D 

Among sexually active men < 35 years old, acute epididymitis is most frequently 
caused by Chlamydia trachomatis and Neisseria gonorrhoeae. First-void urine is the 

preferred specimen for nucleic acid amplification testing (NAAT) for these 

organisms. Acute epididymitis can also be caused by sexually transmitted enteric 

organisms in men who are the insertive partner during anal intercourse. Bacterial 

urine culture is indicated for men older than 35 years, a recent history of insertive 
anal intercourse, or presence of obstructive urinary pathology. Urethral swab culture 

has largely been replaced by NAAT. Urethral swab culture is obtained to look for 
antibiotic susceptibility in patients who have received CDC-recommended treatment 

O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


but continue to have a positive NAAT result. Serologic testing is used for genital 
herpes and syphilis which do not cause epididymitis. Renal ultrasound would be 
indicated for recurrent epididymitis in childhood which may be due to an ectopic 

ureter. In the absence of urinary symptoms, he is unlikely to have any bladder outlet 

pathology, and uroflowmetry would not be indicated. 

AUAUNIVERSITYCORECURRICULUM:Sexually transmitted infection. Updated 

March 1, 2021. https://university.auanet.org/core/uroIogic-infections/sexually


transmitted-infection/index.cfm 

Workowski KA, Bolan GA: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Sexually 
transmitted diseases treatment guidelines, 2015 MMWR RECOMM REP 2015;64(RR03):
1-137. 

Question #129 ANSWER=C 

Behavioral strategies, including start-stop, squeeze, and sensate focus, have been 
studied in combination with pharmacological approaches to increase ejaculatory 

latency time (ELT) and sexual satisfaction beyond that resulting from 
pharmacological treatment alone. Several studies have shown that the inclusion of 

behavioral therapies increases ejaculatory latencies by about one minute over 

pharmacological therapy alone. Patient-reported outcomes such as sexual 
satisfaction, anxiety, and partner satisfaction also improve. Other studies have 

suggested that incorporation of psychobehavioral intervention increases ELT an 

additional one to three minutes compared to pharmacotherapy alone. Combination 
therapy is also associated with greater improvement in scores on validated 

instruments for the assessment of premature ejaculation. In these studies, 

combination treatments lasted from 1.5 to 6 months and the frequency of therapy 

ranged from several hours to sixteen two-hour sessions. Sensate focus, in particular, 
helps men and couples broaden their sexual repertoire to include more foreplay by 
ameliorating fear that prolonged non-coital stimulation will lead to ejaculation. 

Sensate focus may allow the man to discover the pleasures of foreplay while 

maintaining ejaculatory control. Although trials of combination therapies have 
focused on behavioral strategies as a means of lengthening ELT, incorporation of 
cognitive-behavioral therapy may also improve sexual satisfaction by expanding the 
couple's sexual behavioral repertoire, improving communication, and addressing 
relationship dynamics. Psycho-behavioral therapies impart no significant AEs, but 
typically require a specialist in psychosexual therapy and may not be covered by 

insurance. 

Shindel AW, Althof SE, Carrier S, et al: Disorders of ejaculation: AUA/SMSNA 
GUIDELINE (2020).https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/disorders-of-ejaculation 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Ejaculation and orgasm disorders. Updated 
January 21, 2021. https://university.auanet.org/core/sexual-medicine


andrology/disorders-of-ejaculation-and-orgasm/index.cfm 

O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 67 


Question #130 ANSWER=E 

After enterocystoplasty, continuous bladder drainage is achieved via a suprapubic 

tube. Mucus production can be excessive and can potentially occlude the catheter. 

The suprapubic tube should be irrigated on a schedule postoperatively and as 

needed when urine drainage slows. An I.V. fluid bolus would be inappropriate 

before making sure that the bladder is draining. A cystogram would likely reveal the 

occluded catheter but is unnecessary. Although shunt malfunction/infection is 

possible since the shunt is in the surgical field, his symptoms do not suggest any 

problems with the shunt. In the early postoperative period, fever is usually due to 

non-infectious causes. Empiric antibiotic treatment should be started for 

postoperative fever if clinical assessment suggests infection as the likely cause. 

Thomas JC, Clayton DB, Adams MC: Lower urinary tract reconstruction in children, in 

Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL 

WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 1, chap 37, p 695. 

Question #131 ANSWER=A 

This patient has hypergonadotropic hypogonadism, with atrophic testes, elevated 

serum FSH, low testosterone, and mildly elevated prolactin. This is indicative of non


obstructive azoospermia. The evaluation includes genetic testing, including 

karyotype and Y chromosome microdeletion analysis. Cystic fibrosis testing is not 

indicated, as he has a normal semen volume, and thus, does not have absent vas 

deferens or seminal vesicles. Pseudoephedrine can be used to manage retrograde 

ejaculation, but there is no evidence of this with a normal ejaculate volume. Mild 

elevation of prolactin levels between 20 to 50 ng/mL does not warrant further 

evaluation with MRI scan to evaluate for a pituitary tumor, which typically 

demonstrates prolactin levels > 80 ng/mL and suppressed FSH and LH levels. TRUS is 

not indicated with normal semen volume. 

Niederberger CS, Ohlander SJ, Pagani RL: Male infertility, Partin AW, Peters CA, 

Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 

12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 2, chap 66, pp 1447-1448. 
Question #132 ANSWER=C 

The AUA Guidelines define microhematuria as the presence of greater than or equal 

to three RBC/hpf on a single urine specimen. Based on the AUA Microhematuria Risk 

Stratification System, this patient would initially have been classified as low risk for 

genitourinary malignancy based on age (women < 50 years old), absence of 

symptoms, absence of a smoking history, and degree of microhematuria (3-10 

RBC/hpf on a single urinalysis). Patients classified as low risk for genitourinary 

malignancy may, according to the Guidelines, decide to repeat a urinalysis within six 

months (or undergo evaluation with cystoscopy and renal ultrasound). The presence 

O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


of persistent microhematuria at the time of repeat urinalysis then results in the 
patient being re-classified into either the intermediate or high risk categories based 
on the degree of microhematuria noted at the time of repeat urinalysis. This patient 

would be classified in the intermediate risk category for genitourinary malignancy 
based on the presence of 3-10 RBC/hpf on repeat urinalysis. The Guidelines 
recommend evaluation for intermediate-risk patients (i.e., rather than just 
subsequently repeating a urinalysis), specifically with a cystoscopy and renal 
ultrasound. Notably, white light cystoscopy is specifically advised by the Guidelines 
for microhematuria evaluation, due to the lack of current evidence supporting a role 

for enhanced cystoscopy in patients without a known bladder cancer diagnosis. 

Moreover, while CT urogram is recommended as a component of the evaluation for 
patients classified as high-risk for genitourinary malignancy, given the overall low 

rate of upper tract urothelial carcinoma among microhematuria patients, as well as 
the potential harms and cost associated with CT urogram, the 2020 AUA Guidelines 

Panel recommended a risk-based approach to microhematuria evaluation using 
renal ultrasound for intermediate-risk patients and CT urogram for high-risk 
patients. Similarly, the Guidelines state that retrograde pyelography may be utilized 
for patients classified as high-risk who have contraindications to multiphasic CT 
urography and MR urography. Moreover, retrograde pyelography does not provide 
imaging of the renal cortex, and so when cystoscopy with retrograde pyelography is 
utilized, then either non-contrast axial imaging or renal ultrasound should be 

performed as well. 

Barocas DA, Boorjian SA, Alvarez RD, et al: Microhematuria: AUA/SUFU Guideline. J 

UROL 2020;204:778. https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/guidelines/microhematuria 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Hematuria. Updated March 1, 2021. https://
university.auanet.org/core/consults-emergencies/consults-emergencies-hematuria 

Question #133 ANSWER=A 

This patient likely has a variant of congenital bilateral absence of the vas deferens 
(CBAVD). It is possible to have a palpable scrotal vas deferens with absence of the 

inguinal portion and seminal vesicles. This is evidenced by his low volume 
azoospermia. Karyotype is not indicated in this patient with likely obstruction. 
Scrotal ultrasound will not help delineate the non-palpable vas deferens and will not 

help with the diagnosis. A testicular biopsy will confirm normal spermatogenesis but 
will not determine where the obstruction is or even identify the missing structures. 
Seminal fructose would confirm the absence/obstruction of seminal vesicles but not 
identify the etiology. 

Schlegel PN, Sigman M, Collura B, et at: Diagnosis and treatment of infertility in men: 

AUA/ASRM GUIDELINE Part II. J UROL 2021;205:44. 

https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/guidelines/male-infertility 

Saitz TR, Thomas AA: Unilateral segmental dysplasia of the vas deferens. CAN J UROL 
2018;25:9620-9622. 

O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 69 


Question #134 ANSWER=B 

This patient has delayed drainage based on mildly elevated T1/2 (greater than 20 

minutes is considered abnormal) with retained renal function. The delayed drainage 

may be from reservoir effect alone, or there could be some dysfunction or obstruction 

of the UPJ. MR urography would offer both anatomical and functional information that 

might help confirm the presence of UPJ obstruction, but the retained renal function 

on the renal scan is not consistent with a severely obstructed kidney. Infants also 
require anesthesia to achieve adequate MR urography results. Similarly, a 
retrograde pyelogram would outline the anatomical findings but expose the patient to 

general anesthesia. Managing this with ureteral stent placement at this time is not 

indicated given the excellent differential relative renal function but may be of use in 

equivocal cases when they are followed by a renal scan to assess a change in renal 

function. Indications for pyeloplasty include worsening dilation on repeat ultrasound, 

low or decreasing renal function, urinary tract infections, urolithiasis, or symptoms 

such as severe flank pain. Infants may also have feeding difficulties or failure to 

thrive. The majority of cases resolve over time and will not require surgical 
intervention. Therefore, patients who do not meet indications for immediate surgery 

should be observed with serial ultrasound and/or repeat renal scan. 

Olsen LH, Rawashdeh YFH: Surgery of the ureter in children: Ureteropelvic junction, 

megaureter, and vesicoureteral reflux, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, 

Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. 

Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 1, chap 42, pp 826-827. 

Koff SA: Neonatal management of unilateral hydronephrosis. Role for delayed 

intervention. UROL CLIN NORTH AM 1998;25:181-186. 

Question #135 ANSWER=D 

According to the 2019 AUA/SUFU Guideline statement, percutaneous tibial nerve 

stimulation (PTNS) is a third line treatment for OAB. The tibial nerve is a branch of the 

sciatic nerve which is made of fibers from L4 through S3 spinal roots. Stimulation of 

the tibial nerve causes “cross-talk” with the sacral fibers to the bladder. Optimal 

PTNS positioning causes flexion of the great toe and tickling of the sole of the foot 

due to efferent and afferent effects. The tibial nerve travels behind the medial 

malleolus of the ankle; the needle for PTNS is placed about 3 to 4 cm cephalad to 

the medial malleolus. 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Overactive bladder: Evaluation and treatment. 

Updated March 1, 2021. https://university.auanet.org/core/OAB/overactive-bladder


evaluation-and-treatment/index.cfm 

O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


Heesakkers JPFA, Blok B: Electrical stimulation and neuromodulation in storage and 
emptying failure, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ 

(eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, 

chap 122, p 2749. 

Lightner DJ, Gomelsky A, Souter L, et al: Diagnosis and treatment of overactive 

bladder (non-neurogenic) in adults: AUA/SUFU Guideline Amendment 2019. J UROL 

2019;202:558. https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/guidelines/overactive-bladder


(oab)-guideline 

Question #136 ANSWER=E 

The patient has a right renal mass with tumor thrombus extending into the 
suprarenal IVC and bland thrombus (composed likely primarily of platelets and not 
malignant tissue) in the infrarenal IVC. Tumor thrombus can often (as here) be 

distinguished from bland thrombus on contrast MRI by the presence of 
enhancement. The bland thrombus appears to be completely occluding the IVC, 
consistent with the patient's history of lower extremity edema. In the setting of bland 

thrombus, particularly with complete IVC occlusion, systemic anticoagulation is 

often initiated to prevent further clot extension or embolization and to maintain the 

patency of collateral vessels. Optimal management of these patients, particular 
without clear evidence of significant metastatic disease, is with surgical resection. 

Surgical resection entails nephrectomy with tumor thrombectomy. In addition, for 

patients with complete occlusion of the infrarenal IVC from bland thrombus, IVC 

ligation may prevent thrombus extension and embolization postoperatively. Indeed, 

IVC ligation has been demonstrated to be well tolerated in this setting, as collaterals 

have developed from the state of complete occlusion. While intraoperative IVC filter 

placement in the infrarenal IVC has been described for patients following 
nephrectomy with tumor thrombectomy who have a patent IVC and non-contiguous 

bland thrombus in the iliac or femoral vessels, such an approach would not be 
recommended, or likely feasible, in a patient with bulky, occlusive infrarenal IVC clot. 

Renal artery angioembolization is typically utilized for palliation in patients with 
symptomatic large renal tumors who are not candidates for surgical resection. While 
angioembolization may be used preoperatively as well in select circumstances, 

robust evidence supporting an improvement in perioperative outcomes with this 
approach is lacking. Importantly, moreover, percutaneous IVC filter placement is not 

recommended in the setting of a tumor thrombus, as in fact the thrombus may 
infiltrate into the tines of the filter and significantly complicate surgical resection. 
While cabozantinib as well as the combination of ipilimumab and nivolumab 

represent systemic therapy options for patients with metastatic RCC, the bulk of 

evidence supporting a benefit to treatment with either of the regimens is for patients 

with predominantly clear cell RCC, and specifically for patients with intermediate 

or poor risk metastatic disease. This patient: (a) has a non-clear cell histology, (b) 

would likely be characterized as having favorable risk disease if metastatic, but 

moreover (c) does not definitively have metastatic disease, as the noted pulmonary 

nodules are indeterminate based on size/number, and indeed frequently such 
radiographic findings do not represent metastases. 

0 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 71 


Olumi AF, Blute ML: Open surgery of the kidney, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi 

LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. 

Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 2, chap 101, pp 2266; 2277. 

Adibi M, Kenney PA, Thomas AZ, et al. Prediction of pulmonary metastasis in renal 

cell carcinoma patients with indeterminate pulmonary nodules. EUR UROL 

2016;69:352-360. 

Mano R, Vertosick E, Sankin ai, et al. Subcentimeter pulmonary nodules are not 

associated with disease progression in patients with renal cell carcinoma. J UROL 
2015;193:776-782. 

Blute ML, Boorjian SA, Leibovich BC, et al. Results of inferior vena caval interruption 

by greenfield filter, ligation or resection during radical nephrectomy and tumor 

thrombectomy. J UROL 2007;178:440-445. 

Question #137 ANSWER=D 

The clinical scenario presented is consistent with ischemic priapism. Sickle cell trait 
and disease are most common in people whose genetic ancestry is from locations 

with a historically large malaria burden such as Sub-Saharan Africa, South and 

Central America, India, and some Mediterranean countries. When ischemic priapism 

is associated with sickle cell disease (SCD), effective management requires 

intracavernous treatment similar to non-SCD cases. Concurrent systemic therapies 

such as oxygen, hydration, and exchange transfusion may be provided by the 
hematology-oncology team but should not replace therapies directed at the penis 
as the latter provide the best results for resolution of the acute symptoms. Low dose 

daily sildenafil has been shown to decrease recurring episodes in stuttering priapism 

but is not a treatment for the acute setting. Surgical shunts should only be tried if 

aspiration and alpha-adrenergic drug injections fail. 

Broderick GA: Priapism, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein 
AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 

2, chap 70, p 1539. 

Burnett AL, Anele UA, Trueheart IN, et al: Randomized controlled trial of sildenafil 

for preventing recurrent ischemic priapism in sickle cell disease. AM J MED 
2014;127:664-668. doi: 10.1016/j.amjmed.2014.03.019. Epub 2014 Mar 25. PMID: 
24680796; PMCID: PMC4085689. 

AUAUNIVERSITYCORE CURRICULUM:Priapism. Updated March 1, 2021. 

https://university.auanet.org/core/sexual-medicine-androIogy/priapism/index.cfm 

Question #138 ANSWER=D 

This patient would be classified by the AUA/SUO non-muscle invasive bladder cancer 

O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


(NMIBC) guidelines as high-risk based on high-grade T1 (lamina propria invasion) 
pathology. Further, the patient has the additional adverse risk factor of variant 
histology (sarcomatoid differentiation). The presence of variant histology at TURBT 
has been associated with high rates of upstaging and locally advanced disease at 
cystectomy. As such, the AUA/SUO Guidelines state that clinicians should consider 
offering patients with T1 disease and variant histologies radical cystectomy. In light 
of these factors, cystectomy would be the preferred management strategy here. 
Intravesical BCG is utilized as a first-line therapy for patients with high risk NMIBC; 
however, if BCG were to be utilized, repeat TURBT should be performed prior to BCG 

given the risk of upstaging (i.e., to muscle-invasive disease) for patients with high


grade T1 disease. While repeat TURBT is recommended by the AUA Guidelines for 
patients with high-grade T1 bladder cancer, in the case here, given the lack of 
current data supporting a role for neoadjuvant chemotherapy for patients with 

sarcomatoid differentiation from urothelial carcinoma (i.e., if muscle-invasive 

disease was found at repeat TURBT), as well as the lack of data on the efficacy of 

BCG for patients with sarcomatoid urothelial carcinoma, proceeding next with 

radical cystectomy would be appropriate, particularly in light of the relatively young 
age of the patient. Dose-dense M-VAC represents a preferred neoadjuvant 

chemotherapy regimen for patients with muscle-invasive urothelial carcinoma but is 
not indicated at this time for patients with NMIBC. Further, limited data exist to 

support the responsiveness of tumors with sarcomatoid differentiation to M-VAC. 
Similarly, pembrolizumab was approved by the FDA in January of 2020 for the 
treatment of BCG-unresponsive CIS, with or without concurrent papillary disease, in 
patients unwilling/unable to undergo radical cystectomy. However, pembrolizumab 
is not approved for usage in the BCG-naive setting as this patient represents. 
Likewise, limited data exist to date on the use of chemotherapy + XRT for NMIBC, 
and indeed chemotherapy with XRT is not recommended for NMIBC by current AUA 
Guidelines. While trimodal therapy (TURBT + chemotherapy + XRT) represents an 

option for the management of patients with muscle invasive disease, evidence 

supporting its efficacy in sarcomatoid urothelial carcinoma is scant, and as such, 
proceeding with radical cystectomy, rather than repeat TURBT, is appropriate, again 
particularly given the patient's age. 

Kates M, Bivalacqua TJ: Tumors of the bladder, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR, 
Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. 
Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, chap 135, pp 3087-3090. 

NCCN GUIDELINES, Bladder cancer, 2021. 

Balar AV, Kulkarni GS, Uchio EM, et al: Keynote 057: Phase II trial of pembrolizumab 
for patients with high-risk nonmuscle invasive bladder cancer unresponsive to 
Bacillus Calmette-Guerin. Abstract presented at 2019 Genitourinary Cancers 
Symposium. https://ascopubs.org/doi/abs/10.1200/JCO.2019.37.7_suppI.350 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Bladder neoplasms: Muscle invasive bladder 
cancer. Updated March 1, 2021. https://university.auanet.org/core/oncologyadult/
bladder-neoplasms-muscle-invasive-bladder-cancer/index.cfm 

O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


Chang SS, Boorjian SA, Chou R, et al: Diagnosis and treatment of non-muscle invasive 

bladder cancer: AUA/SUO Guideline. J UROL 2016;196:1021. https://www.

auanet.org/guidelines/guidelines/bladder-cancer-non-muscle-invasive-guideline 

Question #139 ANSWER=D 

This patient is exhibiting signs of “supine hypotensive syndrome.“ In the pregnant 

patient, cardiac output is position-dependent, and can drop by as much as 30% when 

supine. The gravid uterus can compress the IVC and cause a decrease in venous 

return. Additionally, the typical sympathetic response that would lead to an increase 

in vascular resistance is blocked by general or regional anesthesia, further reducing 

cardiac output. This can be avoided by placing a wedge under the right side of the 

patient to displace the uterus toward the patient's left side, thereby reducing IVC 

compression. Aggressive fluid hydration is indicated; however, that may not correct 

her hypotension if the poor venous return is not improved. Providing broad 

spectrum antibiotics is appropriate if it is thought that her hypotension is secondary 

to sepsis; however, she remains afebrile, and hypotension occurred with the 

positional change into lithotomy. Her heart rate does not increase because the 

sympathetic response is blocked by anesthesia. Placing her in Trendelenburg will 

only worsen the scenario as it will place more pressure on the IVC and elevate the 

diaphragm, further reducing functional residual capacity and oxygenation. Placing 

a PCNT would require her to be in the right lateral decubitus position, displacing the 

uterus to the right and further compressing the IVC; however, PCNT placement may 

be indicated if stent insertion is unsuccessful. 

Kaufman MR: Urologic considerations in pregnancy, in Partin AW, Peters CA, 

Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 

12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 1, chap 18, p 282. 
Question #140 ANSWER=E 

While local wound care to her labia is warranted, evaluating her abdominal pain is 

more pressing. She may have a rectovaginal fistula or bowel injury. CT scan with 

contrast will allow for complete abdominal evaluation. VCUG can help detect a 

urethrovaginal fistula but will not diagnose the cause of the abdominal pain. Barium 

enema stages the rectum and colon but not the small bowel. Colposcopy may show 

rectovaginal fistula but would not be the first choice. 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Feminizing genital gender affirming surgery. 

Updated February 12, 2021. https://university.auanet.org/core/care-of-transgender


and-gender-non-confirming-patients/feminizing-genital-gender-affirming-surgery


techniques-hospital-pathways-and-management-of-complications/index.cfm 

Question #141 ANSWER=C 

74 Oc 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


Patients with renal artery fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD) should be monitored for 
the development of hypertension. Most patients are asymptomatic, and the 
diagnosis is an incidental finding on imaging studies. Ischemic nephropathy is not a 
sequela of FMD. There is no role for ACE inhibitors in this patient since blood 
pressure is well-controlled and preservation of renal function is not a consideration 
in the treatment of FMD. Percutaneous transluminal renal angioplasty (PTRA) 

provides immediate and long-term blood pressure control in nearly 75% of patients 
and should be offered to young, otherwise healthy patients in whom FMD is 
diagnosed prior to the onset of hypertension. When hypertension has been a chronic 
condition, anti-hypertensive medications can be continued as long as blood pressure 
control is satisfactory. Yearly or twice per year, Doppler ultrasonography-based 
surveillance of kidney length and cortical thickness should be performed. PTRA 
should be performed for refractory hypertension, intolerable medication sideeffects, 
or renal size or functional decrease. It has been shown that balloon 
angioplasty alone is a very effective treatment for renal artery FMD, and stent 
placement does not confer clinically relevant benefits. The latter may be offered 
when there is an inability to eliminate a pressure gradient with angioplasty alone or 
for intimal dissection. Patients with aneurysms or FMD involving distal extrarenal 
branches may be candidates for surgical revascularization. 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Renovascular diseases. Updated March 1, 
2021. https://university.auanet.org/core/renovascuIar-diseases/renovascular-diseases 

Question #142 ANSWER=C 

The Studer pouch is constructed with a U-shaped reservoir and an afferent 
isoperistaltic tubular segment, or limb, into which the ureters are reimplanted. The 
imaging here is consistent with afferent limb stenosis, as there is a cut-point of reflux 
in the afferent limb noted on the cystogram, while images from the MRI scan 
demonstrate hydronephrosis and an hourglass deformity of the neobladder. While 
rare, this is thought to occur due to fibrosis of the midpoint of the ileal segment 
comprising the afferent limb. Stenosis of the limb, in turn, may cause urinary 
obstruction, leading to hydronephrosis and renal function deterioration, as well as 
urinary stasis, predisposing patients to infection. Definitive management would 
require replacement of the afferent limb. At this time, however, renal drainage 
should be established with bilateral PCNTs. This allows an assessment of subsequent 
renal function recovery with such drainage and to interrogate the ureteroileal 
anastomosis, as patency cannot be assured from the imaging provided and bilateral 

ureteroanastomotic strictures should be ruled out with antegrade nephrostograms 

once PCNTs are placed. CIC would not address the lack of drainage from the afferent 

limb, and in particular would not be indicated here with the patient's low PVR. 

Similarly, gentamicin irrigation of the neobladder would not correct the likely 
predisposing factor to the patient's UTIs -urinary stasis from stenosis of the afferent 
limb. Ureteral reimplantation may be required if ureteroenteric anastomotic 
strictures are diagnosed; however, the evaluation provided in the question here does 
not include assessment of the ureteroenteric anastomoses, and therefore, 
reimplantation should not be undertaken until further investigation (i.e., antegrade 

2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


nephrostograms after PCNT insertion) is conducted. Likewise, establishing renal 
drainage and assessing renal function response after relief of obstruction should be 
performed prior to consideration of conversion of the neobladder to an ileal conduit. 
Moreover, the existing, stenotic afferent limb should not be converted to a conduit, 
but rather a new segment of bowel would be required. 

Skinner EC, Daneshmand S: Orthotopic urinary diversion, in Partin AW, Peters CA, 
Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 

12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, chap 141, pp 3250-3253. 
Question #143 ANSWER=A 

Many patients with newly diagnosed germ cell tumors have equivocal imaging 

findings, not clearly consistent with localized or metastatic disease. Most often, this 

manifests as the presence of borderline enlargement (0.8 to 1.5 cm) of lymph nodes 

in the retroperitoneum, sometimes lateralizing to the expected landing zone. In the 

absence of elevated tumor markers, thèse findings should be approached cautiously 

rather than hastily initiating treatment for metastatic disease. Repeating imaging six 
to eight weeks after the initial CT can be helpful in establishing the probable 

etiology. Enlarging lymph nodes are often associated with metastatic disease, while 

stable or regressing lymph nodes suggest benign etiologies. Such a practice, as 

employed by the Swedish Norwegian Testicular Cancer (SWENOTECA) group, helps 
avoid overtreatment with resultant potential for unnecessary toxicity. Up to hall of 

patients with clinical stage 2A NSGCT at diagnosis have false-positive nodes and 

therefore are pathologic stage 1. PET/CT scan is not indicated in patients with NSGCT 

given the lack of differentiation between teratoma and viable germ cell tumor. 

Biopsy of small retroperitoneal nodes can yield false negative results, is technically 

challenging, and is not standard of care in previously untreated patients. To avoid 

potential over-treatment, chemotherapy should not be done immediately as tumor 
markers are normal and the patient has a small retroperitoneal lymph node of 

uncertain significance in the pT1 setting. XRT is not indicated in any patient with 

NSGCT. 

Stephenson AJ, Gilligan TD: Neoplasms of the testis, in Partin AW, Peters CA, 
Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 

12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 2, chap 76, p 1689. 
Stephensön A, Eggener SE, Bass EB, et al: Diagnosis and treatment of early stage 
testicular cancer: AUA Guideline. J UROL 2019;202:272. 

https://www.auanet.org/guidelines/guidelines/testicular-cancer-guideline 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Testis neoplasms. Updated January 19, 2021. 

https://university.auanet.org/core/oncology-adult/testis-neopIasms/index.cfm 

Tandstad T, Dahl 0, Cohn-Cedermark G, et al: Risk-adapted treatment in clinical 

stage I nonseminomatous germ cell testicular cancer: The SWENOTECA management 

program. J CLIN ONCOL 2009;1;27:2122-2128. 

Ô 2022 American Urological Association. AII Rights Reserved. 


Kollmannsberger CK, Nappi L, Nichols C: Management of stage II germ cell tumors: 
Be sure, be patient, be safe. J CLIN ONCOL 2019;37:1856-1862. 

NCCN GUIDELINES: Testicular cancer. Version 2.2021 
https://www.nccn.org/professionals/physician_gls/pdf/testicular.pdf 

Question #144 ANSWER=C 

Renal medullary carcinoma (RMC) is a highly aggressive malignancy arising from the 
collecting duct epithelium of the kidney. Patients generally have sickle cell trait, 
which is more common in those with genetic ancestry from Africa, India, the 
Mediterranean, the Middle East, and other geographical areas with a historically 
high malaria disease burden. Tumors are generally endophytic, central, and 
infiltrative. The regimen of carboplatin and paclitaxel is the preferred first-line 
therapy for patients with metastatic RMC, while gemcitabine and Adriamycin^ are 
reserved for second-line RMC therapy. Ipilimumab and nivolumab is one of the firstline 
therapies for metastatic clear cell RCC. Importantly, surgical resection, either 
with cytoreductive nephrectomy and RPLND or cytoreductive nephrectomy, RPLND, 
and metastasectomy, should not be done in patients with metastatic RMC and an 
ECOG performance status of 2. After multidisciplinary discussion, surgery in a 
deferred fashion may be considered depending on the patient's response to initial 
systemic therapy. 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Renal neoplasms. Updated March 1, 2021. 
https://university.auanet.org/core/oncology-adult/renal-neoplasms/index.cfm 

Campbell SC, Lane BR, Pierorazio PM: Malignant renal tumors, in Partin AW, Peters 
CA, Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, 
ed 12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 2, chap 97, p 2133. 

Msaouel P, Hong AL, Mullen EA, et al: Updated recommendations on the diagnosis, 
management, and clinical trial eligibility criteria for patients with renal medullary 
carcinoma. CLIN GENITOURIN CANCER 2019;17:1-6. 

Shah AY, Karam JA, Malouf GG, et al: Management and outcomes of patients with 
renal medullary carcinoma: A multicentre collaborative study. BJU INT 2017;120:782792. 


Question #145 ANSWER=A 

Pooling of fluid in the vaginal vault should raise suspicion of a fistula. This patient 

needs to be evaluated with a cystoscopy for a potential urethrovaginal fistula 

following her diverticulectomy. A urethral catheter may help in early postoperative 
recovery, but three months postoperatively would not be helpful due to 
epithelialization of the fistula tract. Upper tract evaluation is necessary when 
evaluating a VVF but is not typically necessary with urethrovaginal fistulas. If a 

2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


urethrovaginal fistula is diagnosed, a fascial sling may be considered at the time of 
fistula repair to treat her SUI. A midurethral sling should not be done at the time of 
fistula repair given the risk of erosion in the setting of urethral reconstruction; 
however, a midurethral sling would be an option if this is just SUI and there is no 
fistula. 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Urinary fistulas. Updated December 22, 2020. 
https://university.auanet.org/core/fpmrs/urinary-fistulas/index.cfm 

De Ridder DJMK, Greenwell T: Urinary tract fistulae, in Partin AW, Peters CA, 
Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 

12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, chap 129, p 2924. 
Question #146 ANSWER=B 

Following prostatectomy and lymphadenectomy, unilateral DVT (deep vein 
thrombosis) after surgery should prompt imaging of the pelvis to rule out pelvic 
collections such as lymphocele or abscess which can lead to venous outflow 
obstruction and DVT. For example, in a randomized trial of 500 men evaluating DVT 
prophylaxis prior to prostatectomy (PREVENTER), of which 84% also underwent 
lymphadenectomy, all ten patients with thromboembolic events occurred in those 
having lymphadenectomy. Without respiratory symptoms and normal vital signs, 
chest imaging to rule-out pulmonary embolism (PE) is not required. For patients with 
uncomplicated DVT, the American Society of Hematology (ASH) guideline panel 
suggests offering home treatment over hospital treatment and using direct oral 
anticoagulants (DOACs) over Vitamin K antagonists (VKAs). For primary treatment 
of patients with DVT and/or PE, whether provoked by a transient risk factor, by a 
chronic risk factor, or unprovoked, the ASH guideline suggests using a shorter course 
(3-6 months) over a longer course (6-12 months) of anticoagulation for primary 
treatment. If this was a recurrent or unprovoked DVT or if there was a family history 
of DVT/PE, hypercoagulability work-up should be considered. 

Patel H, Faisal FA, Trock B, et al: Effect of pharmacologic prophylaxis on venous 
thromboembolism after radical prostatectomy: The PREVENTER Randomized Clinical 
Trial. EUR UROL 2020;78:360-368. 

Ortel TL, Neumann I, Ageno W, et al: American Society of Hematology 2020 
guidelines for management of venous thromboembolism: Treatment of deep vein 
thrombosis and pulmonary embolism. BLOOD ADV 13;4:4693-4738. 

Forrest JB, Clemens JQ, Finamore P, et al: Prevention of deep vein thrombosis in 
patients undergoing urologic surgery, AUA BEST PRACTICE STATEMENT, 2008. 
https://www.auanet.org/Documents/education/clinical-guidance/Deep-VeinThrombosis-
Archive.pdf 

2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


Su LM, Otto BJ, Costello AJ: Laparoscopic and robotic-assisted laparoscopic radical 
prostatectomy and pelvic lymphadenectomy, in Partin AW, Peters CA, Kavoussi LR,
Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 12. 
Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, chap 156, pp 3585-3586. 

Question #147 ANSWER=B 

G6PD deficiency is more common in individuals with African or Mediterranean 
ancestry. First-line therapy for treatment of outpatient cystitis in non-pregnant 
women includes nitrofurantoin, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP-SMX), and 
fosfomycin. Both nitrofurantoin and TMP-SMX are contraindicated in significant 

renal insufficiency and in G6PD deficiency. Fosfomycin is not contraindicated in these 

individuals. Fluoroquinolones such as ciprofloxacin are second-line therapy for 
treatment of outpatient cystitis in non-pregnant women. Ceftriaxone would treat the 
infection, but an I.V. antibiotic is not necessary for an afebrile UTI. 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Urinary tract infection (Adult). Updated March 
1, 2021. https://university.auanet.org/core/urologic-infections/adult-urinarytract-
infection/index.cfm 

Question #148 ANSWER=D 

The patient has a squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) within a bladder diverticulum. The 
mouth of the diverticulum arises from the right posterior bladder, and the tumor 
appears confined to the bladder with preserved perivesical fat planes. Bladder SCC 
represent about 3-7% of tumors in the U.S. and in this case, is likely associated with 
urinary stasis and chronic inflammation rather than bilharzial infection. Complete 
endoscopic resection is likely not feasible given the location within a diverticulum. 
The outcome of pure bladder SCC is often poor, given the advanced disease at the 
time of presentation. There is no evidence that neoadjuvant chemotherapy regimensused for urothelial carcinoma are effective with SCC. Likewise, trimodal therapy withchemotherapy and XRT would not be advised given this patient's LUTS and location 
of tumor within the diverticulum. In this case, the best treatment is partial 
cystectomy to excise the bladder diverticulum which would serve to eradicate his 
tumor, possibly improve his LUTS, and afford him the best opportunity to maintain 
his sexual function (as compared to nerve-sparing radical cystectomy). 

Cox L, Rovner ES: Bladder and female urethral diverticula, in Partin AW, Peters CA, 
Kavoussi LR, Dmochowski RR, Wein AJ (eds): CAMPBELL WALSH WEIN UROLOGY, ed 

12. Philadelphia, Elsevier, 2020, vol 3, chap 130, pp 2970-2971. 
Abdel-Rahman 0: Squamous cell carcinoma of the bladder: A SEER database analysis. 
CLIN GENITOURIN CANCER 2016.S1558-7673. 

Walker NF, Gan C, Olsburgh J, Khan MS: Diagnosis and management of 
intradiverticular bladder tumours. NAT REV UROL 2014;11:383-90. 

O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 79 


Question #149 ANSWER=A 

Characteristics of persistent genital arousal disorder (PGAD) include persistent or 
recurrent, unwanted, distressing feelings of genital arousal or being on the verge of 
orgasm (genital dysesthesia), that are not associated with concomitant sexual 
interest, thoughts, or fantasies. This disorder is often associated with shame or even 
suicidal thoughts/behavior for having these persistent and bothersome feelings and 
may result in limited resolution, no resolution, or aggravation of symptoms by sexual 
activity with or without aversive and/or compromised orgasm, aggravation of genital 
symptoms by certain circumstances, despair, emotional lability, catastrophization 
and/or suicidality and inconsistent evidence of genital arousal during symptoms. Risk 
factors include psychiatric and psychological-related pathophysiologies and there 
are reports that stress worsens PGAD symptoms. Conversely, distraction and 
relaxation strategies lessen PGAD symptoms. Other associated etiologies include 
vascular, neurologic, pharmacologic, and hormonal problems. Both arterial (pelvic 
arterio-venous malformations with unregulated arterial communications to the 
genitalia) and venous (pelvic congestion syndrome with ovarian venous 
incompetence and large varices draining the genitalia) vascular causes may lead to 
PGAD. Central neurologic causes such as Tourette's Syndrome, epilepsy, post-blunt 
CNS trauma, post-neurosurgical intervention for arteriovenous malformation, and 
cervical and lumbosacral surgical interventions may also lead to PGAD. Peripheral 
neurologic causes of PGAD include pudendal nerve entrapment and hypersensitivity 
or small fiber neuropathy of the pudendal nerve including its dorsal branch to the 
clitoris. Certain antidepressants (i.e., trazodone) or sudden withdrawal of selective 
serotonin re-uptake inhibitors (SSRIs), as occurs in SSRI discontinuation syndrome, 
have also been implicated as causative factors. In post-menopausal women, initiation 
and discontinuation of hormone therapy may lead to PGAD. Despite these known 
risk factors and etiologies, many cases are attributed to idiopathic causes. 
Identification of potential peripheral neurologic lesions such as pudendal nerve 
entrapment or lumbar sacral pathology in a focused physical examination is critical 
in women suspected of having PGAD. This patient should therefore undergo 
vulvoscopy and neurologic testing. Work-up should also include a detailed history, 
psychological evaluation, and laboratory testing. Initiation and discontinuation of 
hormone therapy in post-menopausal women has been associated with onset of 
PGAD. Clitoral ultrasound studies may be used to diagnose arterial vascular causes 
secondary to pelvic arterio-venous malformations leading to unregulated arterial 
communications to the genitalia. Pelvic ultrasound and transvaginal ultrasound may 
be used to exclude venous vascular causes secondary to pelvic congestion syndrome 
with ovarian venous incompetence and large varices draining the genitalia. 
Neurologic consultation, EEG, and CT and MRI scans may be indicated if there is 
concern about central neurologic causes such as those detailed above. There is no 
evidence that this patient has clitoral adhesions or that daily pseudoephedrine will 
be helpful in resolving PGAD. Pudendal nerve neuromodulation and vestibulectomy 
are not helpful in treating PGAD. 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Female sexual dysfunction: Disorders of desire, 
arousal and orgasm. Updated March 1, 2021. 

2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


https://university.auanet.org/core/sexual-medicine-andrologyffemale-sexual


dysfunction-disorders-of-desire-arousal-and-orgasm/index.cfm 

Question #150 ANSWER=D 

Utilization of a condom catheter is ideal for a man who is unable to perform CIC and 
has low pressure detrusor overactivity. This should put the upper tracts at minimalrisk. The goal is bladder emptying with low storage and emptying pressures. In 
patients with detrusor sphincter dyssynergia, the upper tracts can be protected by 
external sphincterotomy and aggressive TURP. These combined procedures create an 
incompetent outlet, allowing the patient to reflexively void into the condom 
catheter. Unfortunately, over time there can be prostatic and sphincter regrowth, 
stricture formation, or loss of detrusor contractility resulting in high pressure voiding 
and/or incomplete emptying. As a result, UDS should be done first in this patient 
who may not be emptying to completion. Tamsulosin or another alpha-blocker may 
be helpful if prostatic regrowth is identified. While TRUS can evaluate for prostate 
size, the primary concern is related to incomplete emptying secondary to obstruction 
or suboptimal detrusor contractility and UDS would be the next step. A suprapubic 
tube is also an option; however, if the outlet remains minimally incompetent, the 
patient may experience incontinence per urethra even with the suprapubic tube in 
place. Antibiotic prophylaxis should be avoided to prevent bacterial resistance, 
especially prior to evaluating his bladder function. 

AUAUNIVERSITY CORE CURRICULUM: Neurogenic lower urinary tract dysfunction. 
Updated March 1, 2021. https://university.auanet.org/core/neurogenicbladder/
neurogenic-lower-urinary-tract-dysfunction/index.cfm 

O 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


Ô 2022 American Urological Association. All Rights Reserved. 


